India's unique demographic and socio-economic landscape presents significant 
opportunities for AI-driven growth. However, to ensure inclusive progress and 
address the associated risks, it is crucial to establish robust governance 
mechanisms. Given the diversity of India’s needs, a whole-of-government approach 
is essential for effectively managing AI's potential and challenges.

Accordingly, the Government of India has approved the IndiaAI Mission on 7th March 
2024, with a budgetary outlay of INR 10,371.92 crore. The IndiaAI mission will 
establish a comprehensive ecosystem catalysing AI innovation through strategic 
programs and partnerships across the public and private sectors. By democratizing

computing access, improving data quality, developing indigenous AI capabilities, 
attracting top AI talent, enabling industry collaboration, providing startup risk capital, 
ensuring socially impactful AI projects and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive 
responsible, inclusive growth of India's AI ecosystem. The Mission will be 
implemented through its seven key pillars of IndiaAI Compute Capacity, IndiaAI

Application Development Initiative, IndiaAI FutureSkill, Safe & Trusted AI, IndiaAI 
Innovation Centre, IndiaAI Datasets Platform, and IndiaAI Startup Financing. 
The Safe & Trusted AI pillar aims to drive the responsible development, deployment 
and adoption of AI by creating indigenous tools, self-assessment checklists, and

governance frameworks. To further this mandate, IndiaAI had issued an Expression 
of Interest (EoI) to support Safe & Trusted AI Projects across a range of themes, 
including Machine Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, AI Bias Mitigation, 
Privacy-Enhancing Strategy, Explainable AI Framework, AI Governance Testing

Frameworks, AI Ethical Certification Framework and Algorithm Auditing Tools. After a 
comprehensive evaluation process, eight projects have been selected in the first 
round of the EoI and are under implementation. Following the success of this 
initiative, IndiaAI has also launched the 2nd round of the Expression of Interest (EoI), 
inviting organizations to submit proposals on themes, including Watermarking and 
Labelling, Ethical AI Frameworks, AI Risk Assessment & Management, Stress 
Testing Tools, and Deepfake Detection Tools.  
Page  of 
1
22

In further recognition of the need for an India-specific approach to AI governance, 
under the chairmanship of the Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) of India, a multi-
stakeholder Advisory Group has been constituted to undertake development of an ‘AI 
for India-Specific Regulatory Framework’ including representatives from relevant 
ministries. The Advisory Group was tasked with providing guidance on AI

governance and offering insights for the necessary regulatory oversight to enable 
sustainable and ethical development of AI technologies. 
Under the guidance of the Advisory Group, a Subcommittee on ‘AI Governance and 
Guidelines Development’ was constituted to provide actionable recommendations for 
AI governance in India. The Subcommittee’s mandate was to examine key issues

related to AI governance in India, conduct a gap analysis of existing frameworks, and 
propose recommendations for a comprehensive approach to ensure the 
trustworthiness and accountability of AI systems in India. 
The Subcommittee’s report emphasizes the need for a coordinated, whole-of-
government approach to ensure effective compliance and enforcement as India’s AI

landscape continues to evolve. Based on its extensive deliberations, the report 
outlines a series of recommendations that aim to shape the future of AI governance 
in India. These recommendations are based on a careful review of the current legal 
and regulatory context and reflect the Subcommittee’s independent perspective on 
fostering AI-driven innovation while safeguarding public interests.

The Ministry of Electronics and IT acknowledges the valuable recommendations put 
forward by the committee to support its ongoing initiatives on AI governance as 
applicable. In evaluating these recommendations, the Ministry is publishing the 
report for wider public consultation to invite feedback to inform the development of a 
comprehensive AI governance mechanism that advances India’s AI aspirations while

protecting the interests of all citizens. 
Report 
I.
BACKGROUND 
The sub-committee was constituted by the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) on November 9, 2023, to analyse gaps and offer 
recommendations for developing a comprehensive framework for governance of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
Page  of 
2
22

II.
GOVERNANCE OF AI 
AI refers to a range of technologies which can be used for both harm and good. 
Governing the use of AI is driven by the need to minimise risks and harms. While AI 
has been around for many decades, over the last decade, five major developments 
that have brought AI into households and, consequently, into the lexicon of

policymaking, regulation, and governance: 
•
Significant technical progress in the field of machine learning; 
•
Access to much larger datasets for the purposes of training AI systems; 
•
Advancements in computation performance and scale; 
•
Advancement in natural language processing and capabilities; and 
•
Widespread availability of connected devices to deliver apps employing AI

systems to users at scale. 
The combination of these factors has given rise to a new paradigm for developing 
and deploying AI systems – the creation of ‘“foundation models” that, after being 
trained on a huge amount of broad data, can be adapted to many applications., 
including “generative AI” tools accessible to end-users to perform a variety of tasks.

AI systems today can perform complex tasks without active human control or 
supervision. This raises the concern that AI might generate outputs that humans may 
not expect or understand. It can be difficult to understand how different components 
within an AI system interact with each other and which specific component is 
responsible for any potential harm caused. Detecting design defects of an AI system

can be challenging, especially for downstream users of the system. 
A. AI Governance Principles  
Since 2016, several organisations from government, industry, and civil society have 
published “principles” for “responsible and trustworthy AI (RTAI)”.  These set out a 
1
vision for the development, deployment, and use of AI systems that should inform

the design of regulation of such systems as well.  
Much work has also already been done in India to put principles of AI governance 
into practice.  In India, the principles from the apex government think tank  and 
2
3
NASSCOM  represents a good baseline from government and industry, respectively.

4
 For examples of such frameworks, see: the UKRI, Report on the Core Principles and Opportunities for Responsible and 
1
Trustworthy AI, (2023); Center for Long-term Cybersecurity, Decision Points in AI Governance, (2020); Fjeld et. al., Principled 
Artificial Intelligence: Mapping Consensus in Ethical and Rights-based Approaches to Principles for AI, Berkman Klein Center

for Internet & Society, (2020). 
 E.g., NITI Aayog Principles of Responsible AI (2021), Operationalising Principles (2021), and FRT Report (2022); Indian 
2
Council of Medical Research Ethics Guidelines for Application of AI in Biomedical Research and Healthcare (2023); Tamil Nadu

Safe & Ethical AI Policy (2020); TEC Voluntary Standard for Fairness Assessment and Rating of AI systems (2023); TEC 
Voluntary Standard for Robustness of AI systems in Telecom Sector (under development); Telangana AI Procurement Guide 
(under development – 2023); Nasscom Responsible AI Resource Kit (2022) and Guidelines for Generative AI (2023). 
 See: NITI Aayog Principles of Responsible AI (2021). 
3
 See: Nasscom Responsible AI Resource Kit (2022) and Guidelines for Generative AI (2023). 
4
Page  of 
3
22

The OECD AI Principles exemplifies attempts at global convergence.  These efforts 
5
are aligned in substance. 
A proposed list of AI Governance principles (with their explanations) is given 
below. This list is aligned with the OECD, NITI and NASSCOM efforts. The purpose 
of this list is twofold – to be a set of principles aligned with contemporaneous global

and Indian work, and to set the stage for examining how to operationalise these 
principles in the Indian context: 
1.
Transparency: AI systems should be accompanied with meaningful 
information on their development, processes, capabilities & limitations, 
and should be interpretable and explainable, as appropriate6. Users 
should know when they are dealing with AI.

2.
Accountability: Developers and deployers should take responsibility for 
the functioning and outcomes of AI systems and for the respect of user 
rights, the rule of law, & the above principles. Mechanisms should be in 
place to clarify accountability6. 
3.
Safety, reliability & robustness: AI systems should be developed,

deployed & used in a safe, reliable, and robust way so that they are 
resilient to risks, errors, or inconsistencies, the scope for misuse and 
inappropriate use is reduced, and unintended or unexpected adverse 
outcomes are identified and mitigated. AI systems should be regularly 
monitored to ensure that they operate in accordance with their

specifications and perform their intended functions.   
4.
Privacy & security: AI systems should be developed, deployed & used in 
compliance with applicable data protection laws and in ways that respect 
users’ privacy. Mechanisms should be in place to data quality, data 
integrity, and ‘security-by-design’.

5.
Fairness & non-discrimination: AI systems should be developed, 
deployed, & used in ways that are fair and inclusive to and for all and that 
do not discriminate or perpetuate biases or prejudices against, or 
preferences in favour of, individuals, communities, or groups.  
6.

Human-centred values & ‘do no harm’: AI systems should be subject to 
human oversight6, judgment, and intervention, as appropriate, to prevent 
undue reliance on AI systems, and address complex ethical dilemmas that 
such systems may encounter. Mechanisms should be in place to respect 
the rule of law and mitigate adverse outcomes on society.

7.
Inclusive & sustainable innovation: The development and deployment 
of AI systems should look to distribute the benefits of innovation equitably. 
AI systems should be used to pursue beneficial outcomes for all and to 
deliver on sustainable development goals. 
8.
Digital by design governance: The governance of AI systems should 
leverage digital technologies to rethink and re-engineer systems and

processes for governance, regulation, and compliance to adopt 
appropriate technological and techno-legal measures, as may be 
necessary, to effectively operationalise these principles and to enable 
compliance with applicable law.  
 See: OECD, AI Principles, (2019).
5
Page  of 
4
22

Efforts to operationalise the above principles would require commitment from both 
the government and the industry. Meaningful initiatives by the industry ecosystem to 
demonstrate self-governance can significantly enhance trust in the use of AI and 
complement government led governance initiatives.  
B. Considerations to operationalise the principles

The sub-committee has identified three key concepts that can inform the 
operationalisation of the principles and underpin AI governance in India.  
6
1.
Examining AI systems using a lifecycle approach 
A lifecycle approach to the development, deployment, and use of AI systems is 
useful to examine putting the principles into practice effectively. This is because the

risks of AI systems play out differently at different stages in a lifecycle of a given 
system. It is useful to think in terms of three broad stages: 
●
Development which involves examining the designing, training, and testing of a 
given system. 
●
Deployment which involves examining the putting of a given AI system into

operation and use.  
●
Diffusion which involves taking a long-term view and examining the implications 
of multiple AI systems being widely deployed and used across multiple sectors 
and domains. 
Governance efforts should consider the entire lifecycle when operationalising a set of 
principles. 
2.
Taking an ecosystem-view of AI actors

Multiple actors can be involved across the lifecycle of any AI system. Together, they 
create an ecosystem. For example, in the context of the lifecycle of a foundation 
model, multiple sets of actors can be involved, including:  
●
Data Principals  
●
Data Providers 
●
AI Developers (including Model Builders)

●
AI Deployers (including App Builders and Distributors) 
●
End-users (including both businesses and citizens)  
Traditional governance approaches can be limited if they focus on one particular set 
of actors in isolation. By looking at governance across the ecosystem, better and 
holistic outcomes are obtained. An ecosystem-view of actors could also look to

clarify the distribution of responsibilities and liabilities between different actors 
involved in the ecosystem.  
3.
 Leveraging technology for governance 
A complex ecosystem of AI models, systems, and actors is currently unfolding and 
expanding rapidly before us. This complexity and speed can be attributed to various 
 A complex Adaptive System Framework to Regulate AI, https://eacpm.gov.in/wp-content/uploads/2023/10/EACPM-WP26-A-
6
Complex-Adaptive-System-Framework-to-Regulate-AI.pdf 
Page  of 
5
22

factors, including the increasing use of AI models for various applications, the speed 
at which the new AI models are being developed and deployed, and the 
improvements in the quality of the outputs being generated using AI systems 
(particularly generative AI tools). This ecosystem cuts across sectors and domains, 
constituting a wide and evolving regulatory space.

Given this, a conventional “command-and-control” governance strategy may not be 
able to adequately monitor, oversee or promote the growth and expansion of this 
space. There is value in integrating a “techno-legal” approach into the governance 
strategy, where legal and regulatory regimes are supplemented with appropriate 
technology layers (e.g., of governance technology tools along with adequate human

oversight) across actors and systems.  Such a strategy would recognise the value of 
7
using technology to mitigate risks, scale and automate compliance across large 
ecosystems, and enhance the monitoring capabilities of regulators and market 
actors.  
Using technologies to identify the allocation of regulatory obligations/liability across 
the value chain can also help embed directives and guidelines on how different

ecosystem players are to work together and collaborate. This could allow players to 
manage liabilities in the chain leading to lightweight, but gradually scalable, 
regulatory control. 
There can be several different components to make up such a strategy. As a starting 
point, there is merit in examining how technology artefacts, similar to the concept of

“consent artefacts” already proposed by MeitY in their Electronic Consent 
Framework, can perhaps leveraged to assign immutable and unique identities to 
participants, so that their activities can be tracked and recorded to establish liability 
chains between them  
Such artefacts, combined with the contracts between the participants, may allow for

liability to be spread and distributed between them. Such a chain could allow for 
each member of the chain to enforce or require good behaviour on their own part 
and the part of the chain they are connected to such as their suppliers. This could 
potentially enable successful self-regulation across the ecosystem.  
A techno-legal approach could also be optimally used by the Government/ regulatory

body, or an appropriate technical assistance may be extended by the developers and 
deployers of AI systems to identify or trace unlawful information and actors upon 
receipt of a valid request from the Government on specified grounds such as 
prevention, detection, investigation or prosecution of harms, crimes, and security 
incidents. However, it is equally important to note that any such automated tools

using for automating compliance, monitoring, or regulation would need to be 
periodically reviewed themselves, keeping in mind their security, accuracy, fairness, 
and impact on fundamental rights (e.g., like speech and privacy). 
There is a need to strengthen efforts to operationalise the proposed AI Governance 
principles through a well-defined regulatory framework, which leverages technology

and incorporates a “digital by design” approach to achieve the desired outcomes. 
 Examples of governance technology tools, also known as “RegTech tools”, include codified-regulations, AI compliance 
7
systems, blockchain tracking and smart contracting. See, World Economic Forum, Regulatory Technology for the 21st Century, 
(2022). 
Page  of 
6
22

While considering techno legal approaches, it is important to consider that laws 
encoded in technology will be enforced. This may be required in certain context and 
be desirable in some but may not be appropriate in all. Such an approach should not 
shut the door on a level of flexibility that will offer us the freedom to innovate and

improve.   
8
III.
GAP ANALYSIS 
AI systems do not have agency, except to the extent we afford them. In undertaking 
a gap analysis, the sub-committee kept in perspective the fact that existing laws and 
regulations continue to apply to the use of AI. The principles of responsible AI,

including with respect to safety, equality, inclusivity, non-discrimination, and privacy 
are grounded in the fundamental rights enshrined in our constitution. 
Given this, there is a need to examine the suitability of existing laws to deal with risks 
and harms in the context of AI systems. This can provide a meaningful direction to

strengthen the governance framework. Such an analysis should be anchored in 
areas where concerns already exist and where they are likely.  
An informed view of the AI ecosystem is likely to improve efforts for effective 
compliance and enforcement of existing laws and address gaps. Given that use of AI 
is not confined to certain sectors or use cases, implementation of an appropriate AI

governance framework would benefit from a cohesive and co-ordinated effort or a 
whole-of-government-approach. 
Accordingly, the sub-committee focused on identifying gaps taking into consideration 
that: 
(1) Where AI systems can be used to exacerbate well-understood harms, there is a

need to prioritise efforts that enable the effective compliance and enforcement of 
existing laws; 
(2) To govern effectively, regulators will first need access to adequate information 
about the dynamics of the overall AI ecosystem of data, models, apps, actors, 
users, AI systems, etc;   
(3) Since the field of AI is rapidly evolving, and AI systems are increasingly cross-

cutting tools, there is a need for a whole-of-government-approach to deal with 
emerging risks of harm. 
The sub-committee discussed a few other topics which may require policy position, 
or no action, or further observation of the developments before appropriate 
governance mechanisms may be considered. These are listed in the Annexure.

The three considerations mentioned above are discussed in detail below. 
A. The need to enable effective compliance and enforcement of existing laws. 
1. Deepfakes/ fakes/ malicious content 
There are existing legal safeguards/instruments to protect against misuse of 
foundation models for creating malicious synthetic media (i.e., malicious 
‘deepfakes’). In this case, depending upon the context and negative effect of the 
malicious synthetic media in question, multiple laws can apply. For example:  
 See: Rahul Matthan, The Zone of Mischief (2024) 
8
Page  of 
7
22

●
Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act): Section 66D of the IT Act 
criminalises the use of computer resources for cheating by personation. 
Section 66E prescribes the punishment for capturing and publishing or 
transmitting the image of a private area of any person without his or her

consent. Publishing or transmitting obscene material for instance, which could 
be generated by using deepfake technology is a punishable offence under 
Section 67A and 67B of the IT Act.  
●
Indian Penal Code (IPC): In addition to the IT Act, certain harms/cybercrimes

perpetuated by AI could also fall under the IPC. For instance, identity theft and 
cheating by personation are offences under Section 419 (cheating by 
personation), section 463 and 465 (forgery for the purpose of cheating), 
section 292 and 294 (selling/circulating/distributing obscene objects), and

section 499 (causing harm to reputation/defamation). It is to be noted that the 
IPC has been recently replaced by the Bharatiya Nyaya (Second) Sanhita 
(BNS2), and the BNS2 retains these offences.  
●
Other laws: In addition to the IT Act and IPC / BNS2, there could be more

laws depending on the nature of crime or cause of actions involved, like 
Prevention of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (section 12) in the 
event of sexual harassment of children, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act, 2015 (section 75) for causing harm to the children, the

Copyrights Act (section 51), if synthetic content infringes copyrighted work. 
It is worth noting that existing laws can also require specific measures from 
platforms and online service providers to detect and remove malicious synthetic 
media. Under the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021:

●
Rule 3(1)(b) requires intermediaries to inform its rules and regulations, 
privacy policy and user agreement to a user and to make reasonable efforts 
to prevent the dissemination of specific types of content, that may cause 
harm to its users – including information that may violate bodily privacy, 
cause harm to a child, is deceptive, among other things.

●
Rule 3(1)(c) requires intermediaries to periodically inform their users about 
the effects of non-compliance with the rules and regulations, privacy policy, or 
user agreement of such intermediary.  
●
Rule 3(2)(b) requires the intermediary to, within 24 hours of receiving user

complaint of content which is ‘impersonation in electronic form, including 
artificially morphed images of such individual’ remove or disable its access. 
Further, the grievance officer appointed by the intermediary should 
acknowledge user complaints within 24 hours.  
The above shows that the legal framework may be adequate for the purposes of

detecting, preventing, removing, and prosecuting the creation and distribution of 
malicious synthetic media. However, for this legal framework to be effective, it 
needs to be backed by requisite capabilities to enable stakeholders to effectively 
comply and for the authorities to enforce the legal framework.  
Page  of 
8
22

This area points to possible gaps and opportunities for using technological measures 
for enabling effective compliance, so that malicious deepfakes are detected in time 
and/ or are removed before they cause serious harm. For example, as suggested 
above, traceability may be established by assigning unique and immutable identities 
to different participants, such as content creators, publishers, social media platforms,

etc. These may then be used to watermark inputs to, and outputs from, generative AI 
tools. These may be used to track and analyse the lifecycle, from creation to use, of 
a deepfake – and to determine when they have been created without consent or in 
violation of a law (e.g., cheating by personation).

2. Cyber security  
Existing laws including the provisions of the IT Act to deal with cyber security are 
equally applicable when AI is used to compromise cybersecurity.  
The primary national law dealing with cybersecurity is the IT Act. It establishes 
the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-IN) (section 70B) and

the National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) 
(sections 70, 70A). It also defines various types of cybercrimes and establishes 
both a right for individuals impacted by cybercrime to seek compensation, as well 
as criminal penalties for such crimes (if criminal intent is established). Further,

under the IT Act: 
●
The CERT-IN Rules, as well as Cybersecurity Directions 2021, require all 
body corporates to report cybersecurity incidents as well as adhere to certain 
requirements concerning synchronisation of ICT systems clocks as well as 
maintaining security logs. Security incident reporting is also required from

intermediaries under the IT Rules 2021. 
●
The NCIIPC Rules govern operators of “protected systems” and then requires 
them to impose various information security procedures and practices, 
including ensuring they have a Chief information security officer, establish a 
Cyber Security Operation Centre, conduct various risk management 
activities, etc. The Central Government has notified different protected

systems from time to time.  
The second national law that governs cybersecurity is the Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act (DPDPA), which requires data fiduciaries to put in place 
appropriate security safeguards to protect personal data against breaches.  
Beyond the above national laws, sectoral regulators have introduced separate 
cybersecurity guidelines.

●
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has prescribed comprehensive 
cybersecurity standards and guidelines for banks, non-banking financial 
companies, payment system operators, and payment aggregators.  
●
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) has released circulars on 
cybersecurity for stock market participants.  
●
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDAI) also has 
guidelines on cybersecurity for all insurers and insurance intermediaries.  
●
The Department of Telecom requires telecom licensees to report security 
incidents under the licensing framework. 
Page  of 
9
22

Given that AI enables non-technical specialists to carry out sophisticated 
measures, there may be a need to focus on ways to strengthen the application of 
the above cybersecurity framework in the context of use of AI systems. This could 
require suitably upgrading compliance and enforcement capabilities to deal with 
the rapid development of AI and related emerging threats. For example, there

may be a need for guidance to help providers of AI systems build systems that 
work as intended and are “secure by design”. 
3. Intellectual property rights  
A question that is currently the subject of significant analysis, and (in the global 
context) also a matter of litigation, is accounting, under existing laws, for specific

intellectual property rights (IPR) violations that occur through use of AI, 
particularly generative AI.  
The sub-committee examined two areas under the Indian copyright law:  
a. Training models on copyrighted data and liability in case of 
infringement 
Given that copyright law grants the copyright holder an exclusive right to store,

copy etc., creation of datasets using copyrighted works for training foundation 
models, without the approval of the right holder, can lead to infringement.  
9
The Indian law permits a very closed list of activities in using copyrighted data 
without permission that do not constitute an infringement. Accordingly, it is clear 
that the scope of the exception under Section 52(1)(a)(i) of the Copyright Act,

1957 is extremely narrow. Commercial research is not exempted; 
 not-for-profit 
10
institutional research is not exempted. Not-for-profit research for personal or 
private use, not with the intention of gaining profit and which does not compete 
with the existing copyrighted work is exempted. 
Therefore, while the law protects the rights of the copyright holder, do we have

the capabilities to enforce compliance to the existing law? Do we need to identify 
and agree on steps that the entities training on data need to put in place so as to 
demonstrate compliance with the law?  
Despite some guardrails, there might still be infringements of existing works, 
given that multiple persons (e.g., the end-user giving prompts or the model

developer) may be involved in determining the output generated by a 
foundational model. Who would be held liable in case such an output is found to 
be infringing upon an existing copyright? 
The above aspects may require a review to ensure compliance with the law as it 
stands.  
There are also policy level questions – for example, should AI systems be

allowed to train on bulk datasets that may include copyrighted data, without 
taking approval from each copyright holder? If so, under what circumstances this 
 Section 14(c), Copyright Act, 1957.
9
 See, Rupendra Kashyap v. Jiwan Publishing House, 1996 (38) DRJ 81 at para 21. It says, “if a publisher publishes a book

10
for commercial exploitation and in doing so infringes a copyright, the defence under section 52(1)(a)(i) would not be available to 
such a publisher, even though the book published by him may be used or be meant for use in research or private study”.
Page 
 of 
10
22

may be considered so that rights of the copyright holders are not infringed? Do 
we need to interpret or clarify the scope of rights that should exist with the 
copyright holder? What guardrails must be introduced, if we are able to address 
the questions above? The answers can help improve legal certainty and clarify 
the way forward for a lawful use of AI systems.

b.
Copyrightability of work generated by using foundation models 
Given the requirement of ‘human authorship’ for copyright protection, the 
eligibility and scope of granting copyright for works generated by using foundation 
models is untested under existing law.  
In the case of AI, while human interference is required to initiate the process of

creating an output (writing the algorithm, giving a prompt, etc.), there may be not 
enough interpretation or guidance available, for example, on the following: 
●
How much human input is necessary to qualify the user or developer of an AI 
system as an ‘author’ of a generated work. 
●

Whether work generated by using AI models can be termed as a type of 
‘computer generated work’ eligible for copyright protection under the 
Copyright Act. 
By proactively creating appropriate guidance, the relevant authorities (Copyright 
Office, Ministry of Commerce & Industry) can provide certainty and clarity to the 
users as well as to other government authorities who may otherwise adopt

inconsistent practices.   
A consultation of what would be appropriate guidance to clarify whether and to 
what extent creative works generated by using foundation models can be eligible 
for copyright protection, might be useful. 
After answering these policy level questions, we can examine opportunities for 
leveraging techno-legal measures, including those that enable tracing the use of

copyrighted data in training of AI models.   
4.
AI led bias and discrimination 
Issues of AI entrenched biases are cross cutting. Biases in a non-AI context are 
more likely to be in pockets and less co-ordinated. When they creep into AI 
systems, the effects would be based on system deployment and the concerns

would be based on context and scale of deployment. It is also important to 
understand that in many decisions there may be a notion of bias, however, only 
biases that are legally or socially prohibited need to be protected against. 
At a fundamental level, it is important to examine how our existing laws deal with

harm like biases/ discrimination. For example, our employment laws, laws 
protecting minorities and consumer protection law provide protection against 
discrimination. However, how consumer/ user rights are adequately protected 
when AI is used in decision-making is an evolving subject and requires a whole of 
the government approach to assess and where needed provide clarity or 
appropriate mechanisms to deal with AI entrenched biases.  
For example, in a non-AI context, individual consumers would be expected to 
complain about discriminatory conduct. In an AI context, it is possible individuals 
Page 
 of 
11
22

may not easily understand discrimination, or even if they see it, they may just 
critique the AI logic and it might be more difficult to establish intent. AI systems 
may reinforce pre-existing biases and without transparency, this may go 
undetected.  
Consider another scenario, deployers may use tools (unknowingly or

unforeseeably) that frustrate complying with current law. E.g., if businesses use a 
biased recruitment tool, leading to violation of the Equal Remuneration Act (as 
subsumed in new Codes), they may not even realise there is a problem. In these 
kinds of scenarios, there may not be important gaps in the legal provisions, but

the need for entities to understand the risks and risk mitigation while deploying 
“black box” models would become important. 
B. The need for transparency and responsibility across the AI ecosystem in 
India 
To govern effectively, regulators will first require adequate information from two 
perspectives –  
●
traceability of data, models, systems, and actors throughout the lifecycle

of AI systems and  
●
transparency from actors regarding the allocation of liabilities and risk 
management responsibilities between each other through contracts.  
This would be necessary to design effective, targeted, and appropriate 
governance mechanisms. An ecosystem-view is especially relevant to 
understand which AI systems are being developed and deployed in India (and by

whom) that are high capability and/or likely to be deployed widely and/or 
deployed in sensitive use-cases. The risks posed by a system depends not just 
on their capability, but on the context of deployment as well. The 
categorisations of systems purely based on computational capacity or data 
parameters may not be effective.

For systems deployed in tightly regulated sectors, they would need to be 
assessed under existing sectoral laws before we evaluate the need for additional 
or fresh laws. The testing of such sectoral laws should, in particular, examine how 
existing rules on assigning liability for non-compliances (e.g., in health, banking,

financial services and insurance, energy, etc.) can be applied to AI systems prone 
to high-risk.  
However, there may well be situations where a sectoral view is limiting, since we 
may not fully understand (i) the risks and/or (ii) the possibility for risks to spillover 
across sectors. Therefore, a view that “high risk scenarios” are likely only in

tightly regulated sectors may not be correct. Given this, as well as the fact that 
many governance concerns may be common or cross-cutting across sectors, it 
might be useful to start examining a baseline framework to ensure transparency 
and responsibility across the overall AI ecosystem.  
C. The need for a whole-of-government approach. 
There are many laws and regulators, departments to deal with many of the 
harms that may arise due to use of AI. Given the sectoral specialisation, this is 
indeed desirable. However, given the rapid technology developments and the 
Page 
 of 
12
22

cross-cutting usage of AI, there is an inefficiency and possibility of gaps due to a 
fragmented approach. Existing departments and regulators are likely to be 
examining AI systems in silos. This prevents a common understanding from 
being built, especially on cross-cutting issues. This gap can make it difficult for

the government to organise multiple initiatives around a common roadmap.  
IV.
Recommendations 
The committee recommends the following: 
1.
To implement a whole-of-government approach to AI 
Governance, MeitY and the Principal Scientific Adviser should 
establish an empowered mechanism to coordinate AI 
Governance. 
The empowered mechanism should be in the form of an Inter-Ministerial AI

Coordination Committee or Governance Group (Committee/ Group). It should bring 
together the various authorities and institutions that deal with AI Governance at the 
national level. The Committee/ Group should have an ongoing status and should not 
be a limited duration mechanism. 
The overall purpose of this Committee/ Group should be to bring the key institutions

around a common roadmap and to coordinate their efforts to implement a whole-of-
government approach. A collaborative and co-ordinated approach by various 
regulators can enable them to be more efficient and effective, given the complexity 
likely to be involved in dealing with AI systems at scale, especially when we take a 
long-term view of the diffusion stage of their lifecycle. This can be especially

necessary in domains and areas where multiple authorities may be concerned (e.g., 
consumer protection, food, transportation, agriculture, health care, etc.).   
The Committee/ Group should enable a whole of government approach to the AI 
ecosystem. Currently, regulators and government departments may have some 
visibility on the AI systems developed or deployed by entities who are under sectoral

regulation (e.g., finance or health) or where the market is concentrated (e.g., 
ecommerce, social media, aggregators). However, the level of visibility would need 
to be adequate to assess potential risks associated with such entities in the context 
of AI. Further, there are likely to be AI systems developed or being developed and/ or

deployed by entities who may not have an interface with the government/ regulators 
from a perspective of affording suitable visibility to enable a risk assessment in 
relation to AI.  
A pre-requisite of governance would be for the government and the regulators to 
have a credible understanding the AI ecosystem in the country so that governance

measures are rooted to the realities of existing and likely risks. The Committee/ 
Group should facilitate this task. 
This would require a conversation-led approach with a view to develop an 
understanding of the ecosystem which can both serve as feedback for strengthening 
governance and enable understanding of possible challenges and gaps in complying 
Page 
 of 
13
22

and enforcing existing laws. It is important to emphasise that such a mapping 
exercise should not result in regulatory overreach through at scale registration and 
reporting requirements.  
With the above context, the Committee/ Group should meet at a regular basis to 
suggest measures to catalyse collaboration between departments and 
regulators, so that they can:

•
apply and strengthen existing laws to minimise risk of harm due to use of AI;   
•
provide legal clarity and certainty around development and use of AI by issuing 
joint guidance;  
•
harmonise existing efforts and initiatives around common terminologies and risk 
inventories;  
•
enable demonstrable self-regulation to operationalise the responsible AI

principles;  
•
take coordinated steps to respond to identified gaps with the benefit of multi-
regulatory support; 
•
create a policy environment which enables the use of AI for beneficial use-cases; 
and  
•
promote the development and deployment of responsible AI applications in their 
domains/sectors.  
In order to enable appropriate measurement of fairness, accountability and

transparency in the Indian context, it is an essential prerequisite to have access to 
the right datasets, relevant to the Indian context, which allows users to assess the 
fairness and bias of their models across standard datasets. The creation of better 
datasets for the Indian context should be stimulated, and sector-specific datasets 
should be identified to enable creation and evaluation of fair models. These

initiatives may be encouraged by the Committee/ Group. 
The Committee/ Group should have a mix of both official and non-official members, 
because such a forum focused on coordinating AI governance must also bring in 
external expertise from industry and academia, given their central role in 
operationalising responsible AI principles in practice.

It may be headed by the Principal Scientific Adviser. Official members could include 
representatives deputed from MeitY, the NITI Aayog, the Telecommunication 
Engineering Centre, Bureau of Indian Standards, other departments of the Central 
Government, as well as sectoral regulators (e.g., RBI, Indian Council of Medical

Research, SEBI, IRDAI, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, etc.). Non-official 
members could include persons capable of representing the interests of AI 
developers, AI deployers, data providers, data principals, and end-users – so that the 
perspectives of the overall ecosystem can be considered. The Committee/ Group 
should invite external experts for discussions to understand and take on board 
diverse perspectives. 
Page 
 of 
14
22

2.
To develop a systems-level understanding of India’s AI 
ecosystem, MeitY should establish, and administratively house, 
a Technical Secretariat to serve as a technical advisory body 
and coordination focal point for the Committee/ Group.  
MeitY should establish and host a technical secretariat that brings in officers on

deputation from departments and regulators participating in the Committee/ Group 
as well as experts from academia and industry.  As the Committee/ Group’s technical 
advisory body and coordination focal point, the Secretariat should: 
•
pool together multi-disciplinary expertise (tech, law, policy, economics, etc.) from 
existing institutions in academia and industry to strengthen capacity across

departments and regulators; 
•
create a map of the stakeholders and actors involved in India’s AI ecosystem and 
conducts regular horizon-scanning exercises of the AI field;  
•
assess risks to consumers & society across applications and domains (incl. 
cross-cutting issues like antitrust, online safety, security, data governance, public

services, employment, etc.); 
•
facilitate the development of metrics (e.g., measurement standards for assessing 
environmental impact of AI in India) & common frameworks (e.g., on data 
provenance, system cards, security, evaluation data sets, use of open source, 
transparency reports etc.); and

•
engage with industry to co-examine novel solutions (e.g., labelling of synthetic 
media, privacy-enhancing technologies, etc.) to operationalise responsible use of 
AI and enable development of appropriate guardrails6; and 
•
identify gaps, which may not be adequately addressable through delegated 
legislation and/ or existing State capacities (such as where a guardrail is required

and how it can be implemented, or where existing adjudicatory or compliance 
capacities need to be strengthened to deal with issues and disputes arising from 
emerging technology led activities including the use of AI).  
It is to be noted that a similar advisory body was recommended by NITI Aayog in 
2021. The functions envisaged by the NITI Aayog for that body may be allocated

appropriately between the Committee/ Group under recommendation 1 (which 
should focus on coordination of policymaking and regulatory functions) and its 
Secretariat (which should focus on horizon-scanning, risk assessment, gap analysis, 
standardisation, and technical advisory).  
The NITI Aayog had noted that any such body must be an “independent technology

wheelhouse advising relevant Government agencies” and “should be autonomous to 
work with individual regulators and Ministries”.  While these are undoubtedly 
11
relevant considerations, the sub-committee notes that, at this stage, it is not 
recommended to establish such a Committee/ Group or its Secretariat as statutory 
 See: NITI Aayog, Operationalizing the Responsible AI Principles, (2021). 
11
Page 
 of 
15
22

authorities, as making such a decision requires significant analysis of gaps, 
requirements, and possible unintended outcomes. Instead, existing pathways should 
be used to set up the Committee/ Group (such as has been done for existing 
mechanisms like the National Startup Advisory Council) and its Secretariat.  
The proposed secretariat could be staffed by existing MeitY officials as well as lateral

hires, young professionals, and consultants. MeitY may form an AI Sub-Group to 
suggest the form and structure of the proposed secretariat along with a detailed term 
of reference. 
3.
To build evidence on actual risks and to inform harm mitigation, 
the Technical Secretariat should establish, house, and operate

an AI incident database as a repository of problems 
experienced in the real world that should guide responses to 
mitigate or avoid repeated bad outcomes. 
To understand the actual incidence of AI-related risks in India, the Technical 
Secretariat should establish an AI incident database and nurture reporting to it. In the 
initial stages, the database should receive reports from public sector organisations

deploying AI systems (whether directly or through public-private partnerships). 
Private entities should also be encouraged to voluntarily report AI incidents to the 
database. The focus should be on defining reporting protocols to ensure 
confidentiality and to focus on harm mitigation, not fault finding.  
It is important to note that an “AI incident” may include a “cyber incident” or a “cyber

security incident” under the IT Act, but the ambit of "AI incident" may also go beyond 
the scope of a cyber incident. While cyber incident relating to AI systems may refer 
to suspected or potential attack or vulnerability against AI systems, AI incidents may 
also refer to adverse or dangerous outcome, resulting from the use of AI that can

disadvantage or harm individuals, businesses, and societies.  AI incidents may 
12
include malfunctions, unauthorised outcomes, discriminatory outcomes, 
unforeseeable outcomes and unexpected emergent behaviour, system failures, 
privacy violations, physical safety problems, etc.  
Typically, these issues became known when they are reported in media or when

there is an ad-hoc escalation by a victim or an identification by a regulator. There is 
merit in the development of an AI incidence reporting database to serve as a more 
systematically collected evidence base to inform governance initiatives. Over time, 
this can help to show patterns and establish a collective understanding of AI

incidents and their multifaceted nature. The OECD AI Incidents Monitor is a useful 
reference – it documents AI incidents to help policymakers, AI practitioners, and all 
stakeholders worldwide gain valuable information about the real-world risks and 
harms posed by AI systems.   
13
Setting up such a database should be taken up as a fresh exercise and not lapsed

into existing cybersecurity incident reporting regimes, since the concept of an “AI 
incidents” goes beyond cybersecurity.  
 See: AI Incident Database, What is an incident? 
12
 See: OECD AI Incidents Monitor, Methodology and disclosures 
13
Page 
 of 
16
22

It is a given that any unlawful activity will be appropriately dealt with through the legal 
framework. However, the AI incident database should not be started as an 
enforcement tool. Its objective should not be to penalise people who report AI 
incidents. Instead, the objective should be to encourage reporting and the learnings

should flow back into the ecosystem. Given this, the suitability of CERT-IN taking on 
the mandate of maintaining an AI incident repository, under the guidance of the 
Technical Secretariat, may be examined. 
4.
To enhance transparency and governance across the AI 
ecosystem, the Technical Secretariat should engage the 
industry to drive voluntary commitments on transparency

across the overall AI ecosystem and on baseline commitments 
for high capability/widely deployed systems.  
Efforts to operationalise the AI Governance principles would require commitment 
from both the government and the industry. In terms of transparency, this can start 
by encouraging demonstrable industry self-regulation through examining the 
adequacy of existing voluntary reports and disclosures being released by current AI

developers and deployers (e.g., transparency reports, model cards, etc.).   
Further, existing laws empower regulators to encourage and, where needed, 
mandate the relevant entities to implement necessary measures to address risks and 
mitigate harms. Through the Committee/ Group, regulators can collaborate to design 
and implement efficient and effective responses6. That said, there may be a need for

a baseline framework that applies to the development and deployment of AI systems 
that are considered medium-to-high risk across domains and sectors.  
Consequently, the Technical Secretariat could start such work by anchoring a 
collaboration with industry to build consensus around voluntary commitments. Such 
commitments can include elements such as: 
•

disclosures of the intended purposes of AI systems and applications; 
•
commitments to release regular transparency reports by AI developers and 
deployers;  
•
commitments to internal and external red-teaming of models or systems in 
areas; 
•
processes to test and monitor data quality, model robustness, and outcomes;

•
processes to validate data quality and governance measures; 
•
processes to ensure peer review by third-party qualified experts; 
•
processes to ensure conformity assessments with accepted responsible AI 
principles; and 
•
security, vulnerability assessment, and business continuity requirements. 
In addition to the private sector adoption of AI, government is also adopting AI for

citizen welfare as well as for law enforcement purposes. Therefore, the above 
recommendations of the sub-committee, including transparency and governance 
measures listed above, may also be adopted by the government and their 
technology providers, wherever relevant. 
Part of such commitments can include use of technological solutions to mitigate the 
risks.  Scalable and reliable technological artefacts and design elements can be 
encouraged from actors involved in each lifecycle stage, and be embedded across 
Page 
 of 
17
22

data gathering processes, model building and retraining processes, as well as the 
final apps and user interactions as the manifestation of the traceability and liability 
chain.  
Industry could also be encouraged to create standardised risk assessment protocols 
that developers and organisations could adhere to during the design and 
development of AI systems for their respective domains.

The specific voluntary commitments are likely to vary for different industry segments 
and should be based on understanding of real risks. These should therefore result 
from deeper engagement through technical workshops and collaborative discussions 
with industry. These efforts may be led by relevant regulators and government 
departments.  
It is expected that industry would be able to demonstrate their adherence to the

voluntary commitments. The voluntary commitments are expected to complement 
the legal framework and should minimise the need for prescriptive/ onerous 
regulations. The voluntary commitments should provide the requisite flexibility to the 
industry to commit to measures which are meaningful and implementable while 
providing the much-needed visibility to the regulators and government to the

governance measures being implemented. 
The role of the Technical Secretariat should be to assist these efforts and bring in 
cross sectoral expertise and a baseline maturity into these commitments. 
5.
The Technical Secretariat should examine the suitability of 
technological measures to address AI related risks. Such 
measures may aid with establishing a systems-level approach. For

example, technology artefacts may be used to model the interactions 
between datasets, models, applications and users in different 
domains and sectors (e.g., healthcare, finance, etc.) and to identify 
and track negative outcomes in real time.  
As noted earlier, the current legal framework has provisions to deal with malicious

synthetic media and is being refined from time to time. To complement the legal 
framework, there is a need to focus on examining the viability of technological 
solutions to strengthen compliance and enforcement tools across a range of AI 
related risks and in-fact across governance and regulatory risks more generally. 
One example, where such viability can be examined, is the proliferation of malicious

synthetic media (referred to as “deepfakes”). Consequently, one of the first areas of 
work, where the Technical Secretariat should undertake research, is to examine the 
viability of such technological solutions, including watermarking, platform labelling, 
and other fact-checking tools. The Secretariat should engage with industry and

governments globally to evaluate the merit and feasibility of standards and 
mechanisms to enable a chain of content provenance even as the content is 
modified across different tools and the modifications are watermarked using different 
technologies. These can then feed into user awareness programs that can be rolled 
out nation-wide through different channels of communications that can be driven by 
the Committee/ Council members.  
In parallel with the efforts to examine technological solutions, the Technical 
Secretariat should also undertake a deeper analysis to identify any specific gaps that 
Page 
 of 
18
22

may be required to be addressed to better account for the prevention, detection, 
reporting and awareness of malicious synthetic media. 
6.
Form a sub-group to work with MEITY to suggest specific 
measures that may be considered under the proposed 
legislation like Digital India Act (DIA) to strengthen and

harmonise the legal framework, regulatory and technical 
capacity and the adjudicatory set-up for the digital industries to 
ensure effective grievance redressal and ease of doing 
business.  
Given the rapid development of digital technologies and newer business models, 
there is a need for the proposed legislation (DIA) to be suitably equipped. It is

important for the proposed DIA to empower the government with appropriate 
regulatory and technical capacity and capability to minimise risks of harm from 
malicious use of emerging technologies, including AI.     
For example, there is a need for the Government to review and strengthen the 
mechanisms for redress and adjudication of matters concerning digital technologies

(including the risks posed by AI applications) keeping in mind the rapid growth in the 
digital ecosystem and the adoption of digital technologies at scale. This should 
extend to the appellate level. The strengthening should focus on adequate capacity 
in terms of human resourcing, qualifications and expertise, use of technology, and 
the avoidance of unnecessary overlaps between different forums. MeitY should

consider introducing requirements for Grievance Appellate Committees (GACs)  and 
Adjudicating Officers (AOs) to be “digital by design” and to employ online dispute 
resolution systems in the discharge of their functions. Further, currently, the IT 
Secretaries in State Governments serve as AOs. These are senior officers with

several other responsibilities. This mechanism should be reviewed so that there is 
appropriate capacity from a future perspective. The qualifications and eligibility 
criteria to serve as an AO may be reviewed to enable officers to serve full-time on a 
dedicated basis and to also enable the entry of external experts (e.g., lawyers,

cybersecurity professionals, etc.).  
In order to holistically review possible areas in the legal framework that can be 
suitably strengthened through the DIA, the AI Sub-Group may be tasked to work 
closely with MeitY to make detailed recommendations.  
Conclusion 
Regulation should aim to minimise the risk of harm. Even enabling innovation is a

minimisation of harm as people may not be able to innovate due to lack of clarity or 
gap in law. Therefore, harm mitigation should be the core regulatory principle while 
operationalising the seven principles discussed in this report. 
Page 
 of 
19
22

The question - to regulate the “technology” or an “application,” can only be answered 
in the context of the above core principle and the answer will continue to evolve 
based what is needed to be done to minimise the risk of harm. 
Regulation controls the behaviour of people by calling out what is permissible and/ or

not permissible and penalising deviation from the desired behaviour. Regulation 
imposes costs on everyone. Therefore, the risk of harm has to be real and specific 
for a discussion on regulation and for regulation to be useful. 
Regulation ranges from: 
•
some form of licensing/ authorisation (entity-based regulation – banking, health,

telecom, car manufacturers) or  
•
a set of applicable regulation (activity-based regulation – taxation, online safety, 
consumer protection, data protection, anti-trust, copyright, patent, employment, 
contracting etc.) or  
•
a combination approach (threshold-based identification of entity and application 
of certain regulations for specified activities).

Given that the AI development industry is in the nascent stage, the starting point of 
regulation should be “activity-based regulation” through which people are motivated 
to minimise the risk of harms. Given the horizontal nature of AI use, when needed, 
this approach can evolve into a combination approach. 
Given the broad and cross cutting use of AI, Government should:

●
invest in strengthening existing regulatory capabilities and implementing a 
whole of government approach to effectively govern its use; and 
●
adopt a “digital by design” approach to regulation that encourages the 
participants in the AI ecosystem to self-regulate each other and develop 
lightweight but effective outcomes-focused regulations for timely intervention 
on the part of the regulator which allow the liability to be attributed to the 
defaulting parties; and 
●
leverage industry ecosystem efforts, including technology-based measures, 
which help demonstrate responsible development and use of AI. 
*** 
Page 
 of 
20
22

Annexure. 
Discussions notes of the sub-committee not directly leading to the 
recommendations. 
 Training of AI models on copyrighted data 
The Indian Copyright Act provides protection to the copyright holder and does not 
allow AI systems to train on copyrighted content without the approval of the copyright 
holder. However, if AI systems were to be allowed to train on copyrighted content

without an approval from each of the right holder – what should be the scope of such 
training? What guardrails would be required to be mandated? How will the rights of 
copyright holder be adequately protected? How will compliance and enforcement be 
implemented? Similar questions arise of eligibility of AI generated work for copyright. 
All this would need to be examined and based on the answers, the legal framework

adapted or left as is.  
Antitrust  
Unfair trade practices as a result of abuse of dominance by a few entities owning 
large AI systems may be a concern given the concentration of computation 
capability, or data clouds. However, this is not a new concern for the competition law, 
in India or elsewhere. Abuse of dominance, vertical integration etc. can also be

examined by the competition commission of india. Further, technology is rapidly 
evolving, a shortage of GPUs pushes the competition to look at models that do not 
need GPUs and would actually be beneficial to the advancement of the field. 
Given the development of AI, new scenarios may emerge which might test the 
regulatory systems. For example, there could be scope for algorithmic collusion

where without explicit communication between entities providing or deploying the 
algorithms. Therefore, the regulators would be best placed to keenly observe the 
developments and engage with industry proactively to understand possible risks.  
Assessing “market dominance” and “abuse of such dominance” requires regulators 
to monitor and analyse the different dynamics across the AI ecosystem. There is

value in examining how techno-legal measures can assist regulators in modelling the 
ecosystem impact of the models and apps.   
Definition of AI 
While some countries have defined AI, Indian laws have generally taken a 
technology agnostic position and focussed on harms and effects. A similar approach 
may be considered at this stage, given the evolving nature of AI technologies. Most

definitions attempt to be future ready but are unlikely to capture how the technology 
may evolve. Other definitions tend to go too broad thereby creating uncertainty as 
traditional software could also be interpreted to be in scope. Definitions are probably 
useful when they are used to pinpoint certain kinds of technologies for which specific 
regulatory provisions are to be mandated. However, both the definitions and the 
manner of identifying systems for regulatory purposes is evolving and requires 
deeper evaluation. 
Safe harbour 
Page 
 of 
21
22

The safe harbour provision (Section 79) in the IT Act provides legal protection to 
intermediaries that host or transmit third-party content online. One of the conditions 
for availing safe harbour is that the intermediary does not “select or modify the 
content”. In case AI models, this condition would not be met in many scenarios. It is

quite evident that AI systems providers or deployers cannot claim safe harbour as a 
default and where they do, they would need to demonstrate that they have satisfied 
the conditions under law.
Page 
 of 
22
22