Governance Guidelines
Enabling Safe and Trusted AI Innovation
India AI
Governance Guidelines
Enabling Safe and Trusted AI Innovation

India AI Governance  Guidelines 
01
Preface
The world stands at the cusp of the Artificial
Intelligence (AI) revolution. This profound dual-use 
technology has the potential to fundamentally
redefine human productivity, scientific discovery, 
and global prosperity. For India, this technological 
inflection point is a force multiplier in achieving

our national aspiration of Viksit Bharat by 2047.
With the vision of AI for All to integrate scale 
with inclusion, sustainability and resilience laid 
down by the Honourable Prime Minister Shri
Narendra Modi, AI must serve as an enabler for
inclusive development across all strata of society. 
Our commitment is to harness AI for the common

good, ensuring its benefits reach the last citizen 
by revolutionizing diagnostics in rural healthcare, 
providing personalized education in local
languages, or enhancing climate resilience for
our farmers. 
Recognizing both the immense promise and 
the inherent risks, ranging from the spread of 
deepfakes, misinformation and algorithmic biases

to threats against national security, the India AI 
Governance Guidelines provides a framework 
that balances AI innovation with accountability, 
and progress with safety. It represents a strategic, 
coordinated, and consensus-driven approach to 
AI governance.
The Guidelines are realized in 4 parts:
Part 1 sets out the seven sutras that ground

India’s AI governance philosophy.
The sutras of Trust, People First, Innovation over 
Restraint, Fairness & Equity, Accountability,
Understandable by Design and Safety, Resilience 
& Sustainability are designed to be technology-
agnostic and applicable across all sectors.
Part 2 examines key issues and offers 
recommendations through six pillars across

three key
domains: enablement (infrastructure, capacity 
building), regulation (policy & regulation, risk
mitigation) and oversight (accountability,
institutions).
 
Part 3 presents an action plan outlining short, 
medium, and long term steps to operationalise 
these recommendations through a whole of
government approach leveraging the Technology

& Policy Expert Committee and AI Governance 
Group for strategic oversight, and the AI Safety 
Institute for technical validation & safety
research. 
Part 4 provides practical guidelines for industry 
actors and regulators to ensure consistent and 
responsible implementation of the
recommendations.
India has developed a pragmatic approach to 
AI governance that is emphasised by a techno-

legal framework supported by voluntary measures 
and Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI). The future 
of India’s leadership in this revolution depends 
on our ability to lead by example in governing 
this technology with foresight, ensuring it remains 
safe, inclusive, and a force for global good.  
Prof. Ajay Kumar Sood 
Principal Scientific Adviser,
Government of India

India AI Governance Guidelines
02
Foreword
India's decade-long success in pioneeringDPI 
platforms like Aadhaar, UPI, and DigiLocker 
among others demonstrates a globally replicable 
model for inclusive empowerment through 
technological advancements. As India shapes 
its path for the next frontier of development,

AI has become the engine to power the next 
generation of public goods, from multilingual 
interfaces like Bhashini to advanced healthcare 
and governance solutions. However, the world 
currently faces a critical challenge: the resource 
concentration of AI capabilities compute, data, 
and models is limited to a few global players.

The IndiaAI Mission aims to address this by 
democratizing AI's benefits across all strata of 
society, to bolster India’s global leadership, foster 
technological self-reliance, and ensure ethical 
development. 
Through 
the 
Mission, 
the 
Government of India is strategically investing 
in foundational layers of the AI ecosystem,

significantly expanding the country's GPU 
capacity, establishing a national data sharing 
platform, 
and 
enabling 
widespread 
skill 
development, and is ensuring that AI is accessible 
and affordable for every researcher, student, 
and innovator. 
This commitment is effectively realised through 
the Safe and Trusted AI pillar, which provides

the necessary ethical and technical foundation 
to maintain public trust and to build ethical 
models and applications tailored to our unique 
linguistic and cultural diversity. The success of 
all Mission pillars rests upon this foundational 
layer. Without robust trust and safety measures, 
our efforts in infrastructure, capacity building, 
and application development might impede AI

adoption due to societal and systemic risks. 
Therefore, the Mission has instituted the AI 
Safety Institute (AISI), which provides the critical 
technical expertise needed to conduct research, 
develop draft standards, and perform safety 
testing, ensuring governance is resilient, 
scientifically informed, and capable of addressing 
risks as they emerge.

The India AI Governance Guidelines lay the 
foundation for Safe & Trusted AI through an 
agile and flexible policy architecture with 
technical support from AISI. Rooted deeply in 
the seven sutras of Trust is the Foundation, 
People First, Innovation over Restraint, Fairness 
& Equity, Accountability, Understandable by

Design, and Safety, Resilience & Sustainability, 
these Guidelines ensure that India’s core 
commitment to inclusion translates into practical 
measures that enable prevention of algorithmic 
biases and protect vulnerable groups against 
potential harm. This framework is designed to 
support evolving conceptions of safety and trust 
in tandem with technological breakthroughs 
and through consistent dialogue between the 
government, domain experts, industry, and civil 
society. 
S. Krishnan 
Secretary, 
Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology (MeitY),
Government of India

Table of Contents
India AI Governance Guidelines
03
Introduction
Executive Summary
Part 3: Action Plan 
Part 4: Practical Guidelines for Industry & Regulators
Glossary
Annexures
References
2.1 
Infrastructure
2.2 
Capacity Building
2.3 
Policy & Regulation
2.4 
Risk Mitigation
2.5 
Accountability
2.6 
Institutions
A. 
AI Governance Group (AIGG)
B. 
AI Safety Institute
Overview of India’s AI Governance Framework 
Part 1: Key Principles
Part 2: Issues & Recommendations

Introduction 
India AI Governance Guidelines
04
Artificial intelligence or ‘AI’ is a general-purpose technology that 
has been in development since the 1950s but is now advancing 
at an unprecedented pace. 
Today, AI systems can synthesise information, reason, plan and execute actions with minimal 
human supervision in a variety of mediums and contexts – and they continue to learn and

improve. 
Some experts speculate that AI systems will outperform humans in domains such as 
communication, scientific research, and creative work, within the next decade.  If that is a real 
possibility, what does it mean for AI governance?
As with other dual-use technologies such as nuclear energy, biotechnology, and electricity, AI

is neither inherently beneficial nor harmful. It is a profound innovation that has the potential 
to drive economic growth, scientific progress, and inclusive development at scale. On the other 
hand, because it is probabilistic, generative, agentic, and adaptive, it can exacerbate existing 
harms or create new risks for society.

The goal of these governance guidelines is to strike the right balance between two seemingly 
competing but in fact complementary interests. It presents a governance framework that seeks 
to advance technical progress and mitigate the potential risks of AI to society, while being 
firmly grounded in the needs and aspirations of India. 
i

Executive Summary 
India AI Governance Guidelines
05
India’s goal is to harness the transformative potential of AI for inclusive development and global 
competitiveness, while addressing the risks it may pose to individuals and society. 
A drafting committee (Committee) constituted by the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) in July 2025 was tasked with developing a framework that balances these two

objectives. Its mandate was to draw on available literature, review existing laws, study global 
developments, and develop suitable guidelines for AI governance in India. Details of the Committee 
and its terms of reference are in Annexure 1.
After extensive research, deliberations, and a review of public feedback, the Committee presents this

governance framework in four parts:
Part 1 – Key Principles
Seven guiding principles or sutras have been adapted from the RBI’s FREE-AI Committee report to 
guide the overall approach. These principles have been adapted for application across sectors and 
aligned with national priorities. 
ii
01
05
07

04
06
03
02
Trust is the Foundation 
Without trust, innovation and adoption will stagnate.
People First 
Human-centric design, human oversight, and human empowerment.
Fairness & Equity 
Promote inclusive development and avoid discrimination.
Accountability
Clear allocation of responsibility and enforcement of regulations. 
Understandable by Design

Provide disclosures and explanations that can be understood by the
intended user and regulators. 
Safety, Resilience & Sustainability 
Safe, secure, and robust systems that are able to withstand systemic
shocks and are environmentally sustainable. 
Innovation over Restraint 
All other things being equal, responsible innovation should be prioritised
over cautionary restraint.

India AI Governance Guidelines
06
Part 2 – Key Recommendations: 
This section examines key issues in AI governance from India’s perspective & makes recommendations 
across six pillars:
01       Infrastructure
Enable innovation and adoption of AI by expanding access to foundational resources such as 
data and compute, attract investments, and leverage the power of digital public infrastructure

for scale, impact and, inclusion. 
03      Policy & Regulation 
Adopt balanced, agile, and flexible frameworks that support innovation and mitigate the risks of 
AI. Review current laws, identify regulatory gaps in relation to AI systems, and address them with 
targeted amendments. 
05      Accountability
Adopt a graded liability system based on the function performed, level of risk, and whether due

diligence was observed. Applicable laws should be enforced, while guidelines can assist organisations 
in meeting their obligations Greater transparency is required about how different actors in the 
AI value chain operate and their compliance with legal obligations.
06      Institutions
Adopt a whole of government approach where ministries, sectoral regulators, and other public

bodies work together to develop and implement AI governance frameworks. An AI Governance 
Group (AIGG) should be set up, to be supported by a Technology & Policy Expert Committee 
(TPEC). The AI Safety Institute (AISI) should be resourced to provide technical expertise on trust 
and safety issues, while sector regulators continue to exercise enforcement powers.

04      Risk Mitigation 
Develop an India-specific risk assessment framework that reflects real-world evidence of harm. 
Encourage compliance through voluntary measures supported by techno-legal solutions as 
appropriate. Additional obligations for risk mitigation may apply in specific contexts, for e.g. in 
relation to sensitive applications or to protect vulnerable groups
02      Capacity Building 
Initiate education, skilling, and training programs to empower people, build trust, and increase 
awareness about the risks and opportunities of AI.

India AI Governance Guidelines
07
Part 3 - Action Plan
The Action Plan identifies outcomes mapped to short, medium, and long-term timelines.
Timeframe
Short-term 
Key Priorities
Establish key governance institutions 
Develop India-specific risk frameworks 
Adopt voluntary commitments
Suggest legal amendments 
Develop clear liability regimes

Expand access to infrastructure
Launch awareness programmes
Increase access to AI safety tools 
Medium-term 
Long-term 
Publish common standards
Amend laws and regulations 
Operationalise AI incidents systems
Pilot regulatory sandboxes
Expand integration of DPI with AI
Continue ongoing engagements
(capacity building, standard setting, access
and adoption, etc.)

Review and update governance frameworks
to ensure sustainability of the digital ecosystem.
Draft new laws based on emerging risks
and capabilities
High-level body (AI Governance Group)
Government agencies (MeitY, MHA, MEA, DoT, etc.) 
Sectoral regulators (RBI, SEBI, TRAI, CCI, etc.) 
Advisory bodies (NITI Aayog, Office of PSA, etc.)
Standards bodies (BIS, TEC, etc.)
An institutional framework to implement the AI governance guidelines has also been 
suggested. It maps key agencies to their expected role and functions and includes:

India AI Governance Guidelines
08
Part 4 – Practical Guidelines
This section provides practical guidance for industry actors and regulators to increase clarity, 
predictability, and accountability in the ecosystem. 
For industry: ensure compliance with all Indian laws; adopt voluntary frameworks; publish transparency 
reports; provide grievance redressal mechanisms; mitigate risks with techno-legal solutions.

For regulators: support innovation while mitigating real harms; avoid compliance-heavy regimes; 
promote techno-legal approaches; ensure frameworks are flexible and subject to periodic review.
Together, these guidelines create a balanced, agile, flexible, pro-innovation, and 
future-ready governance framework, enabling India to unlock AI’s benefits for 
growth, inclusion, and competitiveness, while safeguarding against risks to 
individuals and society.

India AI Governance Guidelines
09
Overview of India’s AI
Governance Framework
Below are ten points that summarise India’s overall approach to
AI governance: 
The goal is to encourage innovation and adoption, while protecting individuals and society 
from the risk of harm caused by the development or use of AI. An effective governance

framework is one which balances these twin objectives. India’s approach in general is to govern 
the applications of AI by empowering the relevant sectoral regulators, and not to regulate the 
underlying technology itself.
A balanced, agile, flexible, and pro-innovation approach to AI governance is best suited 
to India’s goals. The primary goal at this stage is to leverage AI for economic growth, inclusive

development, resilience and global competitiveness. Given India’s talent advantage, the wide 
adoption of AI across sectors can result in productivity gains, which can drive economic growth 
and create jobs. Further, AI-based applications, with multilingual and voice-based support, are 
being deployed in agriculture, healthcare, education, disaster management, law, and finance

are enabling digital inclusion and creating real positive impact. A balanced framework would 
help maximise these benefits, while retaining the regulatory agility and flexibility to intervene 
and mitigate risks as and when they emerge. 
Governance frameworks should boost awareness, infrastructure, investments and overall 
domestic capacity.  Key sectors such as pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, manufacturing,

media and social sectors hold significant potential for AI adoption, but to realize this potential 
requires a governance framework to enhance awareness, infrastructure, and investments. 
Initiatives like IndiaAI Mission are steps toward fostering AI adoption. Expanding domestic 
capacity while accelerating responsible adoption across sectors is critical to advancing India’s 
goals of inclusive growth and global competitiveness.

Mitigating the risks of AI to individuals and society is a key pillar of the governance 
framework. In general, the risks of AI include malicious use (e.g. misrepresentation through 
deepfakes), algorithmic discrimination, lack of transparency, systemic risks and threats to 
national security. These risks are either created or exacerbated by AI. An India-specific risk 
assessment framework, based on empirical evidence of harm, is critical. Further, industry-led 
compliance efforts and a combination of different accountability models are useful to mitigate 
harm.

India AI Governance Guidelines
10
Existing regulations can be applied to address many of the risks. Existing laws (for e.g. on 
information technology, data protection, consumer protection and statutory civil and criminal 
codes, etc.), can be used to govern AI applications. Therefore, at this stage, a separate law to

regulate AI is not needed given the current assessment of risks. However, timely and consistent 
enforcement of applicable laws is required to build trust and mitigate harm. 
Legal amendments may be considered to encourage innovation and address gaps. Existing 
laws on copyright may need to be amended, for example, to enable the large-scale training

of AI models, while ensuring adequate protections for copyright holders and data principals. 
Rules for how digital platforms are classified should also be updated to better describe the 
unique functions, obligations, and liability regime applicable to different actors in the AI value 
chain. Similarly, if existing regulations are unable to tackle the emerging risks to individuals,

then additional rights or obligations may be introduced. For example, data portability rights 
could be adopted to give individuals more control over their data.
Techno-legal approaches can be applied to support specific policy objectives. Techno-legal 
solutions can be effective tools of governance. They can be used to give effect to established

policy through verifiable methods. While traditional approaches to governance have focused 
primarily on regulatory instruments, effective AI governance could benefit from technology-enabled 
solutions in areas such as content authentication, privacy preservation, and bias mitigation.
Transparency about the AI value chain can promote accountability. The AI value chain 
comprises various actors (developers, deployers and users), operating at different layers of the

technology stack (data center, models, applications), performing dynamic functions (training, 
customisation, distribution, etc.) through complex inter-personal relationships. Many aspects 
of these technical and organisational relationships are dynamic and not fully understood by 
regulators . Greater transparency about the technical and organisational aspects of AI development 
and deployment will help regulators design governance mechanisms that are targeted,

proportionate and effective. 
Voluntary measures can help mitigate emerging risks. Voluntary frameworks, if proactively 
adopted in the form of principles, commitments, or standards, can help build trust. The goal
of this approach is to enhance trust and safety without introducing burdensome regulations 
during the nascent stage of ecosystem development. As the industry matures, some baseline 
measures may be converted into mandatory requirements, which will be enforced by sectoral 
regulators.

India AI Governance Guidelines
11
A ‘whole of government’ approach is required to coordinate policy actions and prepare 
for future AI development. Given the cross-sectoral nature of AI, the constraints on regulatory 
capacity , and the absence of a nodal regulator for emerging technologies, India’s AI governance 
framework would benefit from a coordinated institutional effort, wherein key agencies, sectoral 
regulators, and standard setting bodies are involved in the formulation and implementation 
of policy frameworks to give effect to the objectives of such AI governance frameworks.

India AI Governance Guidelines
12
Part 1: Key Principles 
The Committee recommends that India’s AI 
governance framework be guided by certain 
principles or ‘sutras’, applicable across sectors 
and technologies.
A useful set of principles in this regard has been 
published by a committee set up by the Reserve

Bank of India (RBI) in August 2025. The committee 
to develop a Framework for Responsible and 
Ethical Enablement of Artificial Intelligence 
(“FREE-AI Committee”)  recommends seven 
principles or sutras to guide AI development 
and risk mitigation in the financial sector. 
These principles have been suitably adapted

below to ensure they have cross-sectoral
applicability, are technology-neutral, and align with this Committee’s recommendations.
01
02
Trust is essential to support innovation, adoption, and progress, as well as risk mitigation. Without 
trust, the benefits of artificial intelligence will not be realised at scale. Trust must be embedded

across the value chain – i.e. in the underlying technology, the organisations building these tools, the 
institutions responsible for supervision, and the trust that individuals will use these tools responsibly. 
Therefore, trust is the foundational principle that guides all AI development and deployment in 
India. 
AI governance frameworks should be human-centric. That means AI systems should be designed

and deployed in ways that empower individuals and reflect the value systems of the people for 
whom the technology is built to serve. From a governance perspective, a people-first approach 
means that humans should, as far as possible, have final control over AI systems, and human 
oversight is essential to maintain accountability. A people-first approach also prioritises human 
capacity development, ethical safeguards, trust and safety.
Trust is the Foundation
People First

India AI Governance Guidelines
13
04
A key goal of India’s approach to AI governance is to promote inclusive development. Therefore, AI 
systems should be designed and tested to ensure that outcomes are fair, unbiased, and do not 
discriminate against anyone, including those from marginalised communities. AI should be leveraged

to promote inclusive development while mitigating risks of exclusion, bias, and discrimination. 
05
03
To ensure that India AI’s ecosystem progresses based on trust, AI developers and deployers should 
remain visible and accountable. Accountability should be clearly assigned based on the function 
performed, risk of harm, and due diligence conditions imposed. Accountability may be ensured

through a variety of policy, technical and market-led mechanisms.
06
Understandability is fundamental to building trust and should be a core design feature, not an 
afterthought. Though AI systems are probabilistic, they must have clear explanations and disclosures 
to help users and regulators understand how the system works, what it means for the user, and

the likely outcomes intended by the entities deploying them, to the extent technically feasible. 
07
AI systems should be designed with safeguards to minimise risks of harm and should be robust 
and resilient. These systems should have capabilities to detect anomalies and provide early warnings 
to limit harmful outcomes. AI development efforts should be environmentally responsible and

resource-efficient, and the adoption of smaller, resource-efficient ‘lightweight’ models should be 
encouraged.  
AI-led innovation is a pathway to achieving national goals, such as socio-economic development, 
global competitiveness, and resilience. Therefore, AI governance frameworks should actively encourage 
adoption and serve as a catalyst for impactful innovation. That said, innovation should be carried

out responsibly and should aim to maximise overall benefit while reducing potential harm. All other 
things being equal, responsible innovation should be prioritised over cautionary restraint.
Fairness and Equity
Innovation over Restraint
Accountability
Understandable by Design
Safety, Resilience and Sustainability

India AI Governance Guidelines
14
Using these seven principles or sutras as guidance, the Committee recommends an approach to 
AI governance that fosters innovation, adoption, and scientific progress, while proposing measures 
to mitigate the risks to individuals and communities. 
Effective governance includes not just regulation, but other forms of policy engagement, including

education, infrastructure development, diplomacy, and institution building. Therefore, the Committee 
has made its recommendations across the following six pillars:
The goal of India’s AI governance framework is to promote innovation, adoption, diffusion, and 
advancement of AI while mitigating risks to society. The government is taking significant strides 
to achieve this goal through the India AI Mission, which across seven pillars, is building the

infrastructural backbone for large-scale adoption. As on August 31, 2025, some highlights include: 
Part 2: Issues & Recommendations 
2.1 Infrastructure
Infrastructure
01
Capacity Building 
02
Policy & Regulation 
03
Risk Mitigation
04
Accountability 
05
 
Institutions

06
Compute: Over 38,231 GPUs are being made available to startups, researchers and developers at 
subsidised rates.  A secure GPU cluster is also being constructed to house 3,000 next-generation
GPUs for sovereign and strategic applications. 
Datasets: AIKosh has onboarded 1,500 datasets and 217 AI models from 34 entities across 20

sectors.  It provides permission-based access, allowing contributors to retain control over data 
usage while facilitating AI development. 
Foundation Models: Four startups are being supported in the first phase to develop India’s 
sovereign models.  They will receive credits and funding covering up to 25% of compute costs, 
provided through a mix of grants (40%) and equity (60%).  
Applications: The India AI Application Development Initiative (IADI) has taken 30 sectoral 
applications to the prototyping stage across different sectors.  
iv
v
vi
vii
viii
ix

India AI Governance Guidelines
15
To ensure the continued development and adoption of AI in India, the Committee recommends 
empowering the India AI mission, line ministries, sectoral regulators and state governments to 
implement such initiatives focused on enablement.
Further, to accelerate AI adoption among MSMEs, the government should provide targeted incen-

tives and financing support, including tax rebates on certified solutions, AI-linked loans through 
SIDBI and Mudra, and subsidised access to GPUs. This will help lower the cost of adoption, if sup-
ported by sector-specific AI toolkits and pre-built starter packs tailored to industries like textiles, 
retail, logistics, and food processing.

frameworks must be developed to support the sharing of anonymised data, data stewardship, and 
data sovereignty.
Moreover, providing access to foundational resources, such as data and computing resources, is 
critical to mitigate the risks of AI. For example, in order to evaluate the fairness of AI systems in 
the Indian context, developers need access to reliable and representative datasets in the form of

standardised ‘evaluation datasets.’ Similarly, access to computing resources is necessary to perform 
safety evaluations and to test and validate the effectiveness of guardrails implemented by developers 
and deployers at population scale. 
The transformational potential of AI in sectors such as agriculture, healthcare, education, and 
governance positions it as a critical enabler of socio-economic development. AI can serve these

goals by building on Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI).
For countries in the Global South, with limited access to AI infrastructure and resources, the cost 
of deploying AI solutions at scale can be prohibitively high. DPI offers a unique pathway to adoption. 
Features such as identity databases, data exchanges, authentication capabilities, and payment

systems can be harnessed to design AI-led solutions that are scalable, affordable, and tailored to 
local needs, which can support widespread adoption. 
Data & Compute Access
Digital Public Infrastructure
While technology-mature sectors such as 
telecom, 
media, 
pharmaceuticals, 
and 
manufacturing are scaling AI rapidly, adoption

remains uneven in agriculture, education, 
healthcare, and public services due to lack of 
adequate infrastructure and access to resources.  
Urban centres demonstrate higher maturity, 
while rural and under-resourced areas lag, 
highlighting the need for more inclusive 
strategies. 
Expanding access to data and compute is 
essential for scaling adoption.  Market incentives 
should be introduced to encourage public and 
private entities to contribute to existing platforms 
like AIKosh, the Open Government Data Platform, 
and the National Data and Analytics Platform.
Further, appropriate data governance 
x
xi
xii
xiii

India AI Governance Guidelines
16
Leveraging DPI can also ensure that AI solutions are embedded with principles of privacy, transparency, 
interoperability, and security by design, which are key pillars of AI governance. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that India’s AI governance strategy support greater adoption 
by focusing on three enablers: expanding access to high-quality and representative datasets,

providing affordable and reliable access to computing resources, and integrating AI with Digital 
Public Infrastructure (DPI). 
The Committee also recommends that special schemes be designed with the specific goal of 
encouraging investments at all levels of the AI value chain. It is only when India is perceived as a 
hub for AI that innovation can be catalysed through private entrepreneurship.

Empower the India AI mission, line ministries, sectoral regulators and state governments 
to increase AI adoption through initiatives on infrastructure development and increasing 
access to data and computing resources.
Increase data availability, sharing, and usability for AI development and adoption with 
robust data portability standards and data governance frameworks.
Encourage the use of locally relevant datasets to support the creation of culturally

representative models and applications. 
Promote access to reliable evaluation datasets and compute infrastructure for AI 
development and deployments, and to conduct safety testing and evaluations. 
Integrate AI with Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) to promote scalability, interoperability 
and inclusivity. 
Recommendations
xiv

India AI Governance Guidelines
17
Increase societal trust and public awareness about the risks and capabilities of AI through 
regular training programs and publicity campaigns. 
Conduct training programs for government officials, regulators and civil servants to 
understand AI technology developments, to manage public procurements effectively, 
and to encourage the responsible use of AI in the public sector.

Develop the capacity of law enforcement agencies (LEAs), police, cybercrime units, and 
prosecutors to detect, investigate and resolve AI-enabled crimes.
Expand capacity building initiatives to achieve deeper penetration of AI into tier-2 and 
tier-3 cities, and in vocational institutes.
Recommendations
India has initiated various capacity building

initiatives, such as the India AI FutureSkills, 
FutureSkills PRIME, and other higher education 
programs in AI. These efforts are currently 
supporting more than 500 PhD fellows, 8,000 
undergraduates, and 5,000 postgraduates.  
These efforts need to be significantly expanded

to enhance AI adoption, address existing 
inequalities, and for inclusive development –
 a key goal of India’s AI governance
framework. 
Small businesses and ordinary citizens need 
both access and exposure to AI’s capabilities. 
In the public sector, officials and regulators 
often do not have the technical grounding to 
evaluate AI procurements, manage risks, or

oversee responsible deployment.  
Therefore, the Committee recommends specific 
initiatives around education, skilling and training 
to build trust, empower people and increase 
adoption, which are key principles or sutras 
guiding India’s overall approach to AI
governance.
2.2 Capacity Building
xv
xvi

India AI Governance Guidelines
18
The overarching goal of India’s AI governance framework is to encourage innovation, adoption 
and technological progress, while ensuring that actors in the AI value chain are mitigating risks 
to individuals and society. In that respect, the Committee has reviewed the current legal framework 
and suggested areas where regulatory intervention is necessary.

In recommending a suitable regulatory approach, the Committee has paid close attention to the 
existing system of laws and regulations in India, comprising constitutional provisions, statutory 
laws, rules, regulations, and guidelines. This includes laws and regulations across domains such 
as information technology, data protection, intellectual property, competition law, media law,

employment law, consumer law, criminal law, amongst others.
The Committee’s current assessment is that many of the risks emerging from AI can be addressed 
through existing laws. For example, the use of deepfakes to impersonate individuals can be 
regulated by provisions under the Information Technology Act and the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita;

and the use of personal data without user consent to train AI models is governed by the Digital 
Personal Data Protection Act. The Annexure to this report contains examples of how existing laws 
can be applied to deal with other AI harms. 
At the same time, there is an urgent need to conduct a comprehensive review of relevant laws

to identify regulatory gaps in relation to AI systems. For example, the Pre-Conception and Pre-Natal 
Diagnostic Techniques (PC-PNDT) Act should be reviewed from the perspective of AI models being 
used to analyse radiology images, which could be misused to determine the sex of a foetus and 
enable unlawful sex selection. In priority sectors such as finance, where such analysis is already 
underway,  regulatory gaps should be quickly identified and plugged in with targeted legal 
amendments and regulations.
2.3 Policy & Regulation
Applicability of existing laws 
xvii

India AI Governance Guidelines
19
There are a few domains in which deliberations are already underway to study regulatory issues 
relating to AI governance and potential gaps. Some of these engagements are by way of inter-ministerial 
consultations, rulemaking under newly adopted laws, and expert committees. In this section, the

Committee outlines a few such areas.
(a) 
Classification and Liability 
The Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act) is the primary legislation that deals with the classification 
of digital platforms, their obligations under law, and related liability. 
The IT Act, given that it was drafted more than two decades ago, requires an update in relation to

how digital entities are classified, specifically in the context of AI systems. For example, there is a 
need to define clearly the roles of various actors in the AI value chain (developer, deployer, users, 
etc.) and how they will be governed under current definitions (’intermediary’, ‘publisher’, ‘computer

system’, etc.). At present, the term intermediary is broadly defined to mean any entity that “on behalf 
of another person receives, stores or transmits [an electronic record] or provides any service with 
respect to such record”. Under current laws, it includes telecom service providers, search engines 
and even cyber cafes.   However, there is a need to provide clarity, especially with regard to how

this definition would apply to modern AI systems, some of which generate data based on user 
prompts or even autonomously, and which refine their outputs through continuous learning.
Therefore, the Committee is of the view that the IT Act should be suitably amended to ensure that 
India’s legal framework is clear on how AI systems are classified, what their obligations are, and how

liability may be imposed.
Another important question is how liability 
should be apportioned across the AI value chain. 
Under Section 79 of the IT Act, legal immunity 
is available to intermediaries for unlawful 
third-party content, provided they do not initiate 
the transmission of data, select the recipient of 
the data or modify it. It appears that such legal

immunity would not be applicable to many types 
of AI systems that generate or modify content. 
Further, the liability of AI developers and deployers 
who fail to observe due diligence obligations 
under the IT Act also needs further deliberations. 
Ongoing deliberations 
(b) 
Data Protection 
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDP Act) which governs the collection and processing

of all digital personal data in India, was adopted by Parliament in August 2023 and will be in force 
once draft rules to implement various aspects of the law are notified. Even as the rulemaking process 
for the DPDP Act is underway, new questions have emerged about the impact of data protection 
regulations on AI development and risk mitigation.

xviii
Key issues include for example, the scope and applicability of exemptions available for the training 
of AI models on publicly available personal data;   whether the principles of collection and purpose 
limitation are compatible with how modern AI systems operate;  the role of ‘consent managers’ in 
AI workflows and the value of dynamic and contextual notices in a world of multi-modal AI and 
ambient computing;   the scope of the research & ‘legitimate use’ exception for AI development;  
and various other issues.  
xix
xx
xxi
xxii

India AI Governance Guidelines
20
(c) 
Content Authentication 
Generative AI technologies, including image, video, and music generation tools offer significant 
opportunities for creativity, human expression, access to knowledge and innovation. At the same 
time, the risks of misuse are significant. The creation and distribution of deepfakes and other

unlawful material, such as child sexual abuse material (CSAM) and non-consensual images (‘revenge 
porn’), have the potential to cause serious harm, especially to vulnerable groups.   India’s AI 
governance framework should therefore preserve the benefits of these technologies while addressing 
their misuse.

In this context, the Committee has examined the issue of content authentication and provenance, 
i.e. the determination of whether or not any piece of information was generated or modified by an 
AI system.
xxiii
The Committee believes that resolving these issues are central to a robust AI governance framework. 
Further, some of the issues raised above may require legislative amendments to take effect, and 
the Committee recommends a detailed review by relevant bodies such as the AI Governance Group, 
which this committee has suggested establishing.

India AI Governance Guidelines
21
This principle of using unique identifiers for content authentication and provenance is embedded 
in existing industry standards such as the Coalition for Content Provenance & Authenticity (C2PA). 
A related issue is content traceability, i.e. tracing the origin of a particular piece of content generated 
or modified by AI. Various forensic tools and attribution methods currently exist for this purpose (for

e.g. watermarking to trace the origin of AI-generated content, dataset provenance tools to identify 
training data sources in copyright infringement cases, attribution methods to determine if harmful 
content originated from a specific AI model).    Such attribution tools have potential utility for both 
content authentication and provenance. At the same time, their inherent limitations must also be

examined (for e.g. the ability of malicious actors to bypass these safeguards and risks to citizen 
privacy).  
A popular method for content authentication is the use of watermarks. Such 
labels and other unique identifiers can be used to authenticate whether or not 
any piece of information was generated or modified by an AI systems.

xxiv
xxv
xxvi
xxvii
In parallel, it is recommended that the proposed AI Governance Group (AIGG), with support from 
the Technology & Policy Expert Committee (TPEC), described later in this report, should review the 
regulatory framework in India applicable to content authentication  and make recommendations

to relevant agencies, such as MeitY, including the use of appropriate techno-legal solutions  and 
additional legal measures if necessary in order to tackle the problem of AI-generated deepfakes in 
India.
The issue of harmful deepfakes is a growing menace to society and immediate action is required. 
Therefore, it is recommended to set up a committee of experts with representatives from

government, industry, academia and standard-setting bodies to develop global standards 
around content authentication and provenance. These standards, governance frameworks and 
technical measures may be presented in standard-setting bodies and subjected to rigorous 
testing to ensure that these measures are effective.

India AI Governance Guidelines
22
Copyright is a contested issue in AI governance, particularly in relation to generative AI systems. 
Public consultations on this topic have yielded strong and divergent views from technology companies, 
news publishers, content creators and civil society on the issue of how legal frameworks can protect 
creative labour without stifling innovation.

Following the publication of the draft report on ‘AI Governance Guidelines Development’ published 
in January, 2025, the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) established 
a committee in April, 2025 to deliberate on this issue.    The DPIIT committee’s mandate includes 
examining the legality of using copyrighted work in AI training and its implications, evaluating the

copyrightability of works produced by generative AI systems, and reviewing international practice 
to propose a balanced copyright framework suited to India’s needs.
Based on current practice, AI models are often trained on large collections of publicly available data 
to improve accuracy and relevance of the model, and to promote inclusivity. Various lawsuits have

been filed claiming that such practices constitute infringement based on the limited exception 
provided under Indian copyright law.  
Globally, some groups are in support of a ‘Text and Data Mining’ (TDM) exception to enable AI 
development. Some jurisdictions, such as the EU, Japan, Singapore and the UK have adopted this

approach in varying capacities.    This Committee is of the view that the committee set up by DPIIT 
for this purpose may consider a balanced approach,  which enables Text and Data Mining, with the 
objective of fostering innovation and enabling provisions to protect the rights of copyright holders.
The Committee awaits the DPIIT committee’s detailed recommendations on these issues.

(d) 
Copyright 
As part of its deliberations, this Committee has 
specifically examined the implications of using 
copyrighted materials in the training and 
development of AI models. 
According to Section 52 of the Indian Copyright 
Act, limited ‘fair dealing’ exceptions apply for 
private or personal use, including research. These 
exceptions are restricted to non-commercial use 
and do not extend to organisational or institutional 
research. As a result, they may not cover many 
types of modern AI training.
xxviii
xxix
xxx
xxxi

India AI Governance Guidelines
23
Global diplomacy on AI governance
Given the strategic importance of technology in protecting national security and sovereignty, AI 
governance is a critical element of foreign diplomacy. This is clearly demonstrated in the centrality 
of international AI governance in various national AI strategies (see for example, the US ‘AI Action

Plan’    and China’s ‘Global AI Governance Action Plan’ ). 
AI governance should therefore be integrated into India’s strategic engagements and foreign policy. 
India should continue its participation in multilateral AI governance forums, such as the G20, UN, 
OECD, and deliver tangible outcomes as host of the ‘AI Impact Summit’ in February 2026.

Foresight on AI governance
The pace of progress in AI makes it challenging for regulation to keep up. For example, highly 
autonomous ‘AI agents’ are demonstrating new capabilities, such as self-directed action and 
multi-agent collaboration, which may require us to rethink our current approaches to governance. 
Potential risks also include autonomous AI-to-AI communication and coordination. Advanced AI

systems may create covert protocols or collaborate with each other in ways that amplify security 
concerns, run disinformation campaigns, and cause disruptive loss of control.  Governance frameworks 
must therefore have clear monitoring standards, audit trails, and ensure that human-in-the-loop 
mechanisms are in place at critical decision points. This is explained in more detail in the next section

under mitigating loss of control.
 The Committee recommends that governance frameworks should be future looking, flexible and 
agile, such that they enable periodic reviews and reassessments. 
As the ecosystem in India matures, the Committee recommends undertaking foresight research, 
policy planning, and simulation exercises to anticipate future issues and demands so that policy 
and regulation can be adapted accordingly. 
The Committee is of the view that India’s balanced approach to
AI governance could benefit countries in the Global South, i.e. a 
majority of the world’s population. 
xxxii
xxxiii

India AI Governance Guidelines
24
Develop governance frameworks that are balanced, agile, flexible, and principle-based, 
and enable monitoring and recalibration based on feedback.
Review the current legal framework to evaluate risks and regulatory gaps. 
Consider targeted legislative amendments to encourage innovation (for eg. in copyright 
and data protection) and to clarify issues around classification and liability.

Develop common standards and benchmarks to achieve regulatory objectives (e.g., on 
content authentication, data integrity, cybersecurity, fairness, etc.). 
Establish a committee of international experts from government, industry, academia and 
standard-setting bodies to develop global standards around content authentication, with 
a focus on certifying information as genuine.

The proposed AI Governance Group (AIGG), with support from the Technology & Policy 
Expert Committee (TPEC) should examine issues of content authentication in detail and 
issue appropriate guidelines.
Create regulatory sandboxes to enable the development of cutting-edge technologies in 
constrained environments affording reasonable legal immunities, provided these tests

produce evidence with published details of what was tested, guardrails applied, risks 
observed, etc.
Support strategic engagements and foreign diplomacy in national, regional and multilateral 
forums to further India’s interests on AI governance issues.
Conduct horizon-scanning and scenario planning analysis to anticipate future developments 
in AI that may require policy or regulatory responses.
Recommendations

India AI Governance Guidelines
25
Risk mitigation is the act of translating policy and regulatory principles into practical safeguards 
to mitigate the possibility of harm. This part of the report sets out different ways in which AI systems 
can be transparent, fair, and accountable, with particular emphasis on risk assessment and mitigation 
frameworks that are best suited for India’s unique context.

Risk Assessment  
The Committee recognises that because AI systems are probabilistic, generative, agentic, and 
adaptive by design, they have the potential to cause harm to individuals and society by either 
creating new risks or exacerbating existing ones. 
Several efforts are underway to measure, evaluate, and classify the risks of AI, and develop frameworks

based on the nature and probability of harm. Based on a review of available literature, the Committee 
outlines the following main categories of risks. 
2.4 Risk Mitigation 
Malicious uses, for example misinformation involving the distribution of harmful AI-
generated content (deep fakes), trojan attacks using AI tools, model or data poisoning,

adversarial inputs in critical infrastructure etc.
01
Bias and discrimination, such as the use of inaccurate data to make a decision about 
future employment, which may result in loss of opportunity or livelihood.
02
Transparency failures from the lack of adequate disclosures, for example the use of 
personal data to develop an AI system without the individual’s consent.

03
Systemic risks, including disruptions in the AI value chain due to market concentration, 
geopolitical instability, and regulatory changes.
04
Loss of control over AI systems, which could disrupt public order and safety. 
05
National security, for example AI-facilitated disinformation campaigns, cyberattacks 
on critical infrastructure and the use of lethal autonomous weapons that threaten 
public safety and national sovereignty including in relation to counter-terrorism efforts 
and maintenance of border security.
06
xxxiv

India AI Governance Guidelines
26
Beyond these categories, there is a special need to protect vulnerable groups from the risks of 
AI. Children face risks from AI recommendation engines not just through exposure to harmful 
content, but through the way algorithms exploit their developing brains by prioritising engagement 
over well-being.    These create harm to the long-term mental development and well-being of

children.    Given the large number of children in India and the increasing usage of AI tools and 
applications by children, India could lead the efforts towards building techno-legal solutions to 
address issues of child safety. Similarly, women face the brunt of AI-generated deepfakes, sometimes 
referred to as ‘revenge porn’, even as the harmful creation and distribution of such content remains

an acute challenge. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that a suitable risk assessment and classification framework 
be developed for India that accounts for its unique social, economic, and cultural context, on the 
basis of which appropriate risk mitigation measures can be deployed.
Incident Reporting
The OECD defines an AI incident as an event, circumstance, or series of events where the development,

use, or malfunction of one or more AI systems directly or indirectly leads to a specific harm. These 
harms include injury to health, disruption of critical infrastructure, human rights violations, or 
damage to property, communities, or the environment.
The database should be a national-level centralised system that has the ability to query and collect

data from smaller, local databases in a federated manner. Local databases may be set up and 
maintained by authorised entities or sectoral regulators, provided they follow a standard schema 
to enable structured data collection and interoperability.   
Such databases are also useful from a national security perspective. They must be expanded to 
include classified threat intelligence involving incidents of Al-enabled disinformation, cyberattacks,

and hybrid threats, provided that such information is securely communicated and stored. Existing 
incident reporting mechanism, such as those operated by the Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT-In) should be leveraged to monitor vulnerabilities in AI systems across critical sectors 
and support the development of AI-driven threat detection tools (e.g., anomaly detection, deepfake

detection) to counter AI-enabled disinformation. Law enforcement agencies (LEAs) may also 
collaborate with the AI Safety Institute (AISI) and Technology and Policy Expert Committee (TPEC) 
to determine how such incident reports can be used to develop risk frameworks that apply to 
sensitive sectors and protection of critical infrastructure, such as telecom networks, energy grids

and nuclear plants.
xxxv
xxxvi
To understand AI-related risks in the Indian 
context, there is a need to collect empirical data 
about the harms caused by AI.    Based on 
global best practices, the Committee suggests 
creating a national database of ‘AI incidents’, 
which gives policymakers insights into the

real-world risks and harms posed by AI 
systems—for example, what types of harm are 
being caused by AI, how does AI contribute to 
the harm, when does it usually takes place, 
what are its main causes, etc.—which will inform 
the development of appropriate risk assessment 
and classification frameworks for India.
xxxvii
xxxviii

India AI Governance Guidelines
27
These incident reporting systems should be designed to encourage participation from public and 
private organisations, sectoral regulators, and individuals, enabling effective analysis of trends across 
sectors.
Organisations should be encouraged to report incidents themselves, through protocols that protect 
confidentiality. The database should be set up in a way that encourages reporting cases without

the threat of penalties, with the goal of identifying harms, assessing its impact, and mitigating 
harm through a multi-stakeholder approach.
Over time, a structured feedback loop should be created: reports feed into threat analysis, which 
helps policymakers identify emerging risks, understand patterns of harm, and strengthen
oversight.     This process will also build a culture of accountability.

Voluntary Frameworks
Voluntary measures typically take the form of industry codes of practice, technical standards and 
self-certifications. Their essential features include optionality, flexibility, adaptability, and lack of 
legal enforceability or punitive action. The table included in Annexure 5 describes various types of 
voluntary frameworks relevant for India.

Such voluntary measures align well with the proposed pro-innovation approach, allowing responsible 
innovation to emerge without compliance-heavy regulations.  They offer the agility to respond 
quickly as risks evolve, and the flexibility to adapt to India’s diverse social and cultural context. Over 
time, such measures can also provide the evidence base for binding rules, ensuring that governance

remains rooted in real-world experience. Therefore, it is important that the evidence they generate 
should be in a format that regulators and common users can understand, and their impact should 
be studied on an ongoing basis.
As the industry matures, some of these voluntary measures may be converted into mandatory 
baseline requirements, which can be enforced by the relevant regulatory bodies. 
The Committee believes that voluntary measures can serve as an
important layer of risk mitigation in India’s AI governance framework.
While not legally binding, they support norms development, create
accountability, and inform future regulatory choices.
xxxix
xl
xli

India AI Governance Guidelines
28
While voluntary measures are useful in a variety of contexts, they should also be proportionate to 
the risk of harm. Low-risk applications may require only basic commitments such as transparency 
reporting and grievance mechanisms, whereas high-risk applications in sensitive sectors such as 
health or finance may require additional safeguards.

The Committee recommends that voluntary measures be adopted to mitigate the risks of AI. Part 
4 of this report contains indicative guidelines for industry and regulators in this regard.
Techno-legal approach
A techno-legal approach to governance uses technology architectures to embed legal requirements 
directly into system design.   It is both a design philosophy and family of architectures that makes

regulatory principles automatically enforceable in practice.
In a techno-legal approach, specific policy measures are codified and embedded directly into the 
underlying system through technical standards and protocols. To the extent that it is possible to 
use technology measures to give effect to regulatory principles, it supports ‘compliance-by-design’.

In other words, “digital architecture enforces what law requires”. 
A techno-legal approach is also useful to enable innovation at scale while mitigating risks to 
individuals and society. For India, that means using digital public infrastructure (DPI) like UPI and 
Aadhar to reach billions of users, with built-in privacy, accountability, and auditability by design. A

techno-legal approach helps reduce administrative burden through automated, standardised 
mechanisms, making risk management more effective and scalable.
Access to
regulatory sandboxes
for firms adopting
voluntary safeguards.
01
02
03
04
Public recognition 
through certifications, 
ratings, or endorsement 
by the government.

Technical assistance, 
toolkits and playbooks 
to make voluntary 
compliance easier.
Venture capital
is directed to firms
that deploy responsible 
approaches to 
innovation. 
Finally, to ensure that
voluntary measures are
adopted at scale, the
Committee recommends
some financial, reputational,
technical, and regulatory
incentives, for example:
xlii
xliii

India AI Governance Guidelines
29
These techno-legal measures tend to be most effective when they have been previously tested. 
Examples of where such measures are useful include content authentication and provenance, 
privacy-preserving tools for AI development, and transparency in automated decisions that have 
an impact on life or livelihood. As a general rules, such measures should be adopted in situations

where there is a clear regulatory objective to be met (for eg. data protection or non-discrimination) 
and the measures are likely to have a positive impact on a large number of people. 
For these reasons, the Committee encourages the development and use of techno-legal measures 
to buttress existing policy choices, regulatory instruments, and voluntary measures outlined in the

AI governance framework for India.
DEPA for AI Training
One example of how a techno-legal approach can potentially be applied towards AI governance is 
‘DEPA for AI Training’. 
Modifying the DEPA for AI Inference architecture and applying it to the development cycle (e.g. 
DEPA for AI Training) is an example of a techno-legal approach with both opportunities and

challenges.   It supports privacy-preserving mechanisms at the input stage of Al model training 
and makes the use of personal data for Al training more transparent and auditable. On the other 
hand, the use of privacy-enhancing technologies can result in a loss of performance on certain 
benchmarks, which could impact their utility. Further, the DEPA for Training architecture also has

a limited role to play in governing downstream Al impacts once the model is trained. These tradeoffs 
must be examined before adopting these approaches.
Therefore, there is a need for complementary measures for effective AI governance, including:
The Data Empowerment and Protection 
Architecture (DEPA), developed in India and 
originally deployed in the financial sector, provides

a techno-legal system for permission-based data 
sharing through consent tokens. 
At its core, DEPA enables techno-legal regulation 
by codifying legal requirements into technology 
architecture, ensuring compliance by design, 
and integrating data protection principles into 
digital public infrastructure.
Algorithmic auditing
to detect bias and
unfairness.
Transparency 
frameworks for 
explainability and 
accountability.
Sector-specific 
regulations for 
sensitive and high-risk 
AI use cases.
xliv
xlv

India AI Governance Guidelines
30
Thus, the DEPA for AI Training approach can act as an enabler, ensuring trust and inclusivity in 
India’s AI ecosystem. Yet, it must sit within a wider AI governance architecture, combining techno-legal 
tools with ethical, regulatory, and institutional oversight.
Mitigating Loss of Control

AI systems, by design, can evolve in ways that are difficult to fully predict, creating the risk of losing 
control.    To mitigate these risks, the Committee emphasises the need for appropriate mechanisms 
to retain control and prevent harm. This includes building, where appropriate, human-in-the-loop 
mechanisms at critical decision points, ensuring that AI outputs can be reviewed, overridden, or

supplemented by human judgment before they cause harm. This is consistent with the ‘People 
First’ sutra referenced earlier in this report.
In some contexts, such as high-velocity algorithmic 
trading, direct human oversight is ineffective, given 
the speed at which they operate. In such cases, 
safeguards such as circuit breakers, automated

checks, or system-level constraints should be 
considered.
Especially in critical sectors, regular monitoring and 
testing, audit trails, and reporting protocols should 
be implemented. The aim is to ensure that AI systems 
remain within defined bounds, that risks are detected 
early, 
and 
that 
appropriate 
risk 
mitigation

interventions are adopted, whether human or 
otherwise.
Develop a risk assessment and classification framework that is customised for India’s local 
context, and accounts for risks to vulnerable groups. 
Establish a robust AI incidents mechanism to encourage individuals and organisations 
to report harm and create a feedback loop to track and analyse risks.

Encourage the adoption of voluntary frameworks to mitigate risks through principles, 
commitments, standards, audits, and appropriate incentives.  
Guide the development and deployment of AI systems that are transparent, fair, open, 
non-discriminatory, explainable, and secure by design.
Use techno-legal measures, where appropriate, to buttress existing policy choices, regulatory 
instruments, and voluntary measures.
Require human oversight and other safeguards to mitigate loss of control risks especially 
in sensitive sectors involving critical infrastructure.
Recommendations
xlvi

India AI Governance Guidelines
31
Legal Enforcement 
The Committee notes that many of the risks associated with AI can be addressed under existing 
laws. However, their effectiveness depends on predictable and timely enforcement. 
Therefore, regulators must ensure that in situations where the use of an AI system has resulted in 
the violation of any law, or where the developer or deployer of an AI system has failed to satisfy

their obligations under applicable laws, the applicable legal provisions may be enforced in order 
to deter repeated offences and to prevent future harm.
To support organisational compliance, clear guidance is essential. Institutions such as the AI Safety 
Institute, referenced in the next section of this report, should provide guidance notes, model codes, 
or master circulars clarifying how existing laws apply to AI development and deployment. Such

guidance will reduce uncertainty for industry actors, promote voluntary compliance, and ensure 
that enforcement is proactive rather than reactive.
Accountability, being one of the seven sutras, is 
the backbone of AI governance. In practice, 
accountability must be secured through a 
combination of formal mechanisms, grounded 
in enforcing laws, and other market mechanisms.

What matters is that firms feel meaningful 
pressure to comply, that regulators have an 
understanding of how firms are complying with 
the law, and that liability is imposed in a clear, 
proportionate, and consistent manner.
2.5 Accountability
Accountability Mechanisms
Since voluntary frameworks lack legal enforceability, there is a need to adopt alternative mechanisms

that can ensure accountability by creating practical checks at both the organisational and industry 
level.      These mechanisms rely on peer pressure, reputational incentives, and institutional oversight.
Transparency reports:
Firms publish red-teaming results,
impact assessments, or risk mitigation
steps, enabling public and peer 
scrutiny.
Self-certifications:

Firms validate their results
through auditors or
standards bodies. 
Internal policies:
Organisations update their
service terms to reflect
commitments.
Committee hearings:
Regulators and parliamentary bodies 
probe firms on their voluntary 
compliance efforts. 
Peer monitoring:
Competitors and civil 
society observe and
report violations.

Techno-legal measures:
Compliance is built into
system design. 
Together, these mechanisms seek to promote voluntary compliance as a first step, following which 
binding legal enforcement may be necessary. MeitY may publish a schedule to ensure compliance 
with these measures in the next 9-12 months.
xlvii

India AI Governance Guidelines
32
Liability 
The Committee is in favour of a graded liability system for AI systems where responsibility is proportional 
to the function performed, the level of risk anticipated, and the degree to which due diligence is 
undertaken. This approach ensures that accountability is meaningful without stifling innovation. The

Committee recommends the following approach in this regard:
Grievance redressal
Clarify how different entities in the AI value chain (e.g. developers, deployers, end-users) are 
governed under existing regulations, such as the IT Act.
Recommend principles for attributing liability and responsibility for the concerned entities

that is proportionate to their function and the risk of harm (for e.g. transparency reporting, 
audits, grievance redressal).
Developing suitable accountability frameworks to mitigate harm. 
In addition, the Committee recognises that AI systems are inherently probabilistic and may generate 
unexpected outcomes, which cause harm, despite reasonable precautions. It notes the recommendation

of the RBI’s FREE-AI Committee in this regard calling for a ‘tolerant’ stance in the financial sector 
towards ‘first time/one-off aberrations’. While it is the prerogative of sectoral regulators to pursue 
enforcement strategies that may be useful in a particular domain, the Committee would like to

emphasise that rule of law is paramount and that enforcement strategies should focus on prevention 
of harm while allowing space for responsible innovation. 
The Committee recommends that organisations 
deploying AI systems should establish accessible 
and effective grievance redressal mechanisms 
as part of their accountability obligations. Such 
mechanisms should be designed to make it easy

and reliable for individuals to report harms or 
concerns, without fear of retaliation or undue 
burden.  
Organisations should adopt a proactive approach, 
ensuring that redressal channels are clearly 
visible, available in multiple languages and 
formats, and responsive within reasonable 
timelines. Feedback received through these 
channels should be systematically analysed and 
integrated into product improvements, creating 
a loop between user experience and risk 
mitigation. These grievance redressal systems 
should also be separate from the AI Incidents 
Database that the Committee has
recommended.
xlviii

India AI Governance Guidelines
33
Transparency
The Committee is of the view that increasing transparency about the technical, economic, and 
organisational aspects that guide the development and deployment of AI systems are foundational 
for designing effective, proportionate, and targeted governance mechanisms, and therefore suitable 
frameworks may be explored to better understand the AI value chain.

Accountability cannot exist without transparency. Regulators need to see and 
understand how AI systems are designed, which actors are involved, the relationship 
between different actors, and the flow of resources (data, compute) through the 
different stages of development and deployment—also referred to as the
"AI value chain".

Clarify how different entities in the AI value chain (for example, developers, deployers, 
end-users) are governed under existing regulations, such as the IT Act.
Impose obligations for each of these entities that are proportionate to their function and 
the risk of harm (for example, transparency reporting, content removal, grievance redressal,

transparency, and legal assistance).
Ensure laws are complied with through timely and consistent enforcement. 
Mandate grievance redressal mechanisms with adequate feedback loops.
  
Provide guidance on how existing laws will be enforced in relation to AI systems (for eg. 
a master circular with a list of applicable regulations to support compliance).
Develop accountability mechanisms that would support voluntary compliance to mitigate 
harm (for example, self-certifications, peer monitoring, third party audits).
 
Increase transparency of the AI value chain so regulators have an understanding.
Recommendations
xlix

India AI Governance Guidelines
34
2.6 Institutions
India’s AI governance framework would benefit from a coordinated effort, in which all line ministries, 
sectoral regulators, standards bodies and other public institutions work together to develop and 
implement AI policy. This is known as the “whole-of-government” approach.
To implement this approach, the Committee recommends the following:

A. 
AI Governance Group (AIGG)
The Committee recommends the creation of an 
AI Governance Group (AIGG) to develop and 
oversee India’s position and strategy on AI 
governance. 
The AI Governance Group should be a small and 
effective decision-making body, with a broad

mandate on AI policy and governance
in India.
Coordinate policy across ministries, departments and sectoral regulators, and oversee 
cross-sectoral governance issues
Review existing mechanisms and issue guidelines to ensure that firms are held accountable 
for compliance with local laws.
Oversee national initiatives on AI governance across the public and private sector.

Promote responsible AI innovation and beneficial deployment of AI in key sectors.
Study the emerging risks of AI, regulatory gaps, and need for legal amendments.
Key functions of the AI Governance Group are suggested as follows:
The relevant sectoral agencies and regulators should take the lead in monitoring harms, providing 
guidance and enforcing regulations in their respective domains. For example, the Ministry of

Finance and Reserve Bank of India (RBI) would be responsible for implementing the AI 
governance framework in the financial sector.
MeitY, as the nodal ministry, is responsible for overall adoption and regulation of AI systems. 
Its role is to promote innovation and adoption of AI technologies, while providing regulatory

guidance in collaboration with bodies such as the AI Safety Institute (AISI) and the Indian - 
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In).
A new body called the ‘AI Governance Group’ (AIGG) should be set up to coordinate policy on 
AI governance across all ministries. It should be a small, permanent and effective inter-agency

body responsible for overall policy development and coordination on AI governance in India. 
It should be supported by a Technology & Policy Expert Committee (TPEC), which will advise 
the group on strategy and implementation. Further details of the proposed AIGG and TPEC 
are provided below.

India AI Governance Guidelines
35
It is suggested that representatives from the following institutions be a part of the group:  
Suggested composition (illustrative and subject to periodic reviews)
A Technology & Policy Expert Committee (TPEC) should be set up by MeitY, comprising a 
small group of experts with experience in domains such as:

The TPEC’s primary goal is to provide expertise to the AI Governance Group (AIGG) and 
enable it to perform its functions effectively. It will brief the AIGG on matters of national 
importance in relation to AI policy and governance, including with respect to:
Chair
Principal Scientific Adviser (PSA)

Government
agencies 
Regulators
Advisory bodies
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
Ministry of Home Affairs
Ministry of External Affairs
Department of Science & Technology
Department of Telecommunications 
NITI Aayog
Office of Principal Scientific Advisor
Research and development in frontier technologies
Engineering, machine learning, data science, etc.

Law and public policy with a focus on emerging technologies
Public administration, including current and former government officials 
National security, including law enforcement experts
New and emerging capabilities of AI
Potential risks and regulatory gaps 
Global developments in AI policy and governance 
India’s diplomatic engagements on AI governance
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)

Competition Commission of India (CCI)
Data Protection Board (DPB) 
Sectoral regulators and bodies such as the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI), Securities and Exchange Board
of India SEBI, Indian Council of Medical Research
(ICMR), University Grants Commission (UGC), etc.
Technology & Policy Expert Committee (TPEC)

Coordinate with agencies, sectoral regulators, and public bodies on AI safety issues. 
Analysis the emerging risks of AI and potential regulatory gaps. 
Develop draft guidelines, codes, standards, respective evaluation metrics and testing frameworks 
in collaboration with relevant agencies and sectoral regulators.
Provide practical advice to support voluntary efforts to mitigate risks.

Conduct forecasting research on the potential impact of AI and issues in online safety, privacy, 
data governance, labour, and competition.
 
Promote the adoption of AI safety tools in areas such bias mitigation, fairness testing, and 
explainability, through platforms, APIs and open access tools.
 
Foster public-private partnerships to develop tools that can support law enforcement and

enhance trust and transparency.
Conduct training programs on AI safety to build awareness and institutional capacity.
Represent India in international forums such as the Network of AI Safety Institutes, ensuring 
that India’s perspectives on scale, diversity and inclusion are reflected. 
Support the TPEC and AIGG by providing risk assessments, updates on industry compliance

and policy recommendations.
The AISI can operate on a hub-and-spoke model and should be supported by a dedicated secretariat 
for research, drafting, and capacity building.
Key functions of the AISI are suggested as follows:
India AI Governance Guidelines
36
B. 
AI Safety Institute
The recently established AI Safety Institute (AISI) should act as the main body responsible for guiding

the safe and trusted development and use of AI in India. 
The AISI should be involved in research, risk assessment, and capacity-building. It should test and 
evaluate AI systems for risks and provide advice to policymakers and industry actors on issues of AI 
safety. Further, the ongoing work under the IndiaAI mission to support the development of technical

solutions to address issues relating to machine unlearning, bias mitigation, privacy-enhancing tools, 
explainable AI, etc. should also continue.  
The AISI should also anchor India’s participation in global forums and facilitate collaborations, such 
as in the International Network of AI Safety Institutes.
l

India AI Governance Guidelines
37
Establish an AI Governance Group to coordinate overall policy development and align AI 
governance frameworks with national priorities and strategic objectives.
Constitute a Technology & Policy Expert Committee to provide expert inputs to the AI 
Governance Group on matters of national and international importance relating to AI 
governance.
Provide adequate resources to the IndiaAI Safety Institute to conduct research, develop 
draft standards and their evaluation metrics and testing methods and benchmarks, 
collaborate with international bodies, national standard making bodies and provide 
technical guidance to regulators and industry. 
Recommendations

India AI Governance Guidelines
38
Part 3: Action Plan
The Action Plan below identifies outcomes mapped to short, medium and long-term timelines.
Establish the AI Governance 
Group (AIGG) as a permanent 
high-level policy making body.
Constitute the Technology & 
Policy Expert Committee (TPEC)

to support the AIGG. 
Develop India-specific AI risk 
assessment and classification 
frameworks with sectoral inputs.
Conduct regulatory gap analysis 
and suggest appropriate legal 
amendments and rules.
Adopt voluntary frameworks to 
promote responsible innovation 
and mitigate risks.
Publish a master circular with 
applicable regulations and best

practices to support compliance.
Prepare the groundwork for AI 
incidents database and grievance 
redressal mechanisms.
Develop clear liability regimes 
across the AI value chain.
Expand access to foundational 
infrastructure including data, 
compute and models.
Launch public awareness and 
training programs for citizens 
and regulators on AI capabilities

and risks.
Operationalise Safe and Trusted 
tools in areas such as bias 
mitigation, privacy-enhancing 
tools, deepfake detection, etc.
Timelines
Action Items  
Expected Outcomes 
Short-term
Strong institutions to coordinate 
AI governance.
Frameworks for risk classification 
and mitigation customised for 
the Indian context.
Culture of voluntary industry 
compliance. 
Understanding of regulatory 
gaps and needs.
Infrastructure 
in 
place 
for 
incident reporting and grievance 
redressal.
Improved societal trust and 
literacy on AI.

India AI Governance Guidelines
39
Publish common standards (e.g. 
content authentication, data 
integrity, fairness, cybersecurity).
Operationalise 
national 
AI 
incidents database with localised 
reporting and feedback loops.
Amend laws, as may be needed, 
to address regulatory gaps 
Pilot regulatory sandboxes in

high-risk domains
Support the integration of Digital 
Public Infrastructure (DPI) with 
AI with policy enablers.
Timelines
Action Items  
Expected Outcomes 
Medium-term 
Long-term
Continuously review and monitor 
the governance framework and 
activities under this Action Plan 
Adopt new laws to account for

emerging risks and capabilities. 
Expand 
global 
diplomatic 
engagement and contribute to 
standards development.
Conduct horizon-scanning & 
scenario planning to prepare for 
future risks and opportunities.
Mature, balanced and agile legal 
framework.
International credibility in AI 
governance leadership.
Effective accountability system 
for AI harms.
Future-ready governance system 
for emerging risks.
Mature, standardised governance 
framework.
Safe experimentation environ-
ment for innovation.
Broader adoption of DPI-enabled 
AI systems
Easier compliance through guid-
ance and updated laws.
Effective grievance redressal for 
citizens.

India AI Governance Guidelines
40
Institutional framework for AI Governance in India (illustrative)
An institutional framework to implement the AI governance guidelines is suggested below, 
mapping key agencies, sectoral regulators, advisory bodies to key functions. 
Key Institution
Key functions
Inter-Ministerial
body
AI Governance Group

(AIGG)
Overall policy
formulation coordination
of AI governance in India
across all agencies 
Nodal ministry 
Government agencies
Advisory bodies
Ministry of Electronics
and Information
Technology (MeitY)
Ministry of Home Affairs
(MHA)
Ministry of External Affairs
(MEA)

Ministry of Agriculture 
Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Healthcare
Department of Science
and Technology (DST)
Department of
Telecommunications (DoT)
Department for Promotion
of Industry and Internal
Trade (DPIIT)
Indian - Computer
Emergency Response
Team (CERT-In)
Grievance Appellate

Committee (GAC)
AI Safety Institute (AISI)
Technology & Policy Expert
Committee (TPEC)
National Institution for
Transforming India
(NITI Aayog)
Office of the Principal
Scientific Advisor (PSA)
Supporting the AI
Governance Group with
regular briefings and
strategic advice on

AI governance 
Responsible for AI
governance in their
respective domains 
Issuing sector-specific
rules and regulations 
Enforcing applicable laws
and regulations in these
domains 
Supervising compliance
efforts and legal mandates
for domain-specific
applications.
Handling grievances in
their respective domains
Monitoring of AI-driven
disinformation,
cybersecurity analysis and
attribution.
Responsible for India’s
diplomatic engagements
on AI governance
Nodal ministry responsible
for AI governance in India 
li

India AI Governance Guidelines
41
Key Institution
Key functions
Sectoral regulators
and bodies
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI)
Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority of
India (IRDAI)
Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (TRAI)

Indian Council for Medical
Research (ICMR)
National Health Authority
(NHA)
Issuing sector-specific rules
and regulations 
Enforcing applicable laws
and regulations in these
domains 
Supervising compliance
efforts and legal mandates
for domain-specific
applications
Handling grievances in
their respective domains
Standards bodies
Bureau of Indian
Standards (BIS)
Telecommunication
Engineering Centre (TEC)
Developing standards in
relation to AI risk
taxonomies, certification
standards, etc. 
Engagement with global 
tandard setting bodies 
Standardising testing,
assessment, evaluation
and validation procedures

India AI Governance Guidelines
42
Part 4: Practical Guidelines for Industry
& Regulators
Guidelines for industry 
The Committee recommends that any person involved in developing or deploying AI systems in 
India should be guided by the following:
Comply with all Indian laws and regulations, including but not limited to laws relating to

information technology, data protection, copyright, consumer protection, offences against 
women, children, and other vulnerable groups that may apply to AI systems.
Demonstrate compliance with applicable laws and regulations when called upon to do so by 
relevant agencies or sectoral regulators. 
Adopt voluntary measures (principles, codes, and standards), including with respect to privacy

and security; fairness, inclusivity; non-discrimination; transparency; and other technical and 
organisational measures.
Create a grievance redressal mechanism to enable reporting of AI-related harms and ensure 
resolution of such issues within a reasonable timeframe. 
Publish transparency reports that evaluate the risk of harm to individuals and society in the

Indian context. If they contain any sensitive or proprietary information, the reports should be 
shared confidentially with relevant regulators.  
Explore the use of techno-legal solutions to mitigate the risks of AI, including privacy-enhancing 
technologies, machine unlearning capabilities, algorithmic auditing systems, and automated 
bias detection mechanisms.

India AI Governance Guidelines
43
Guidelines for regulators 
The Committee suggests the following principles to guide policy formulation and implementation 
by various agencies and sectoral regulators in their respective domains:
The twin goals of any proposed AI governance framework is to support innovation, adoption 
and the distribution of the technology’s benefits to society, while ensuring that potential risks

can be addressed through policy instruments. 
Governance frameworks should be flexible and agile, such that it enables periodic reviews, 
monitoring, and recalibration based on stakeholder feedback. 
When using policy instruments to mitigate risks, regulators should prioritise those where 
there is real and present harm or a threat to life, livelihood or well-being.

Proposed AI governance frameworks should avoid compliance-heavy requirements (for example, 
mandatory approvals, licensing conditions, etc.) unless deemed necessary. 
The appropriate regulator or agency should determine which type of policy instrument is the 
most useful, relevant, and least burdensome to achieve the desired objective (for example, 
industry codes, technical standards, advisories, binding rules).
Regulators should encourage the use of techno-legal approaches to meet policy objectives 
around privacy, cybersecurity, fairness, transparency, etc. where such policy measures have 
already been put in place.

India AI Governance Guidelines
44
Glossary
Sl. No.
Term
Description
Accountability
01
Adversarial Input
Attacks
02
Agentic AI
03
AI Incident
04
AI Safety Institute
05
Algorithmic Trading
06
Artificial Intelligence
07
The obligation of individuals or organizations to

account for their actions, accept responsibility, 
and disclose results transparently through specific 
means and criteria. 
Deliberate changes to input data intended to 
mislead AI models into incorrect decisions or 
predictions.
Highly autonomous system that senses and 
responds to its environment and takes actions 
to achieve its goals.

An event where an AI system malfunctions, 
produces unintended outcomes, or behaves 
unpredictably, potentially causing harm or violating 
legal rights.
An institution under India AI Mission promoting 
safe, secure, and trustworthy AI innovation by 
coordinating research and collaboration across 
academia, industry, startups, and government.

Automated rule-based trading where decisions 
are made by computer models. 
An AI system is a machine-based system that, 
for explicit or implicit objectives, infers, from the 
input it receives, how to generate outputs such 
as predictions, content, recommendations, or 
decisions that can influence physical or virtual 
environments. Different AI systems vary in their 
levels of autonomy and adaptiveness after 
deployment.

India AI Governance Guidelines
45
Auditability
08
Behaviour Audit
09
Bias
10
Data Minimisation
11
Data Poisoning
12
Deepfake
13
Equity
14
Fair treatment of individuals. 
Explainability
15
Fairness
16
Foundation Models
18
Large AI models trained on vast datasets for

general tasks. 
Federated Learning
17
The ability to inspect and verify system processes 
and decisions.
Evaluating AI decisions in real-world settings for 
ethical and legal alignment.
Systematic difference in treatment of certain 
objects, people or groups in comparison to
others.
Collecting only as much personal data as is

necessary to achieve a specific purpose.
Manipulating training data to corrupt AI/ML 
models.
AI-generated or manipulated image, audio or 
video content that resembles existing persons, 
objects, places, entities or events and would falsely 
appear to a person to be authentic or truthful. 
Property of an AI system to express important

factors influencing the AI system results in a way 
that humans can understand. 
Federated learning is a decentralized approach 
to training machine learning (ML) models. Each 
node across a distributed network trains a global 
model using its local data, with a central server 
aggregating node updates to improve the global 
model. 
Ensuring AI decisions are free from harmful bias 
or discrimination.
Behaviour Audit

India AI Governance Guidelines
46
Generative AI
19
GPU (Graphics Processing
Unit)
20
Human in the loop/
Human-allied AI
21
Large Language Models
22
Machine Learning
23
Model Bias
24
Red Teaming
25
Small Language Models
26
Understandability

28
Transparency
27
Models that generate text, images, or other
content.
A co-processor designed to accelerate graphics 
and image processing, and specialized tasks in 
Machine Learning and Deep Learning involving 
heavy matrix operations.
Involving human expertise in the AI lifecycle 
particularly during training and deployment to 
actively improve system performance & reliability.

Foundation models capable of understanding 
and generating natural language. 
A process of optimizing model parameters 
through computational techniques, such that 
the model's behaviour reflects the data or 
experience.
Systematic errors in a model arising from erroneous 
assumptions during the modelling process, that 
cause it to consistently make incorrect or skewed

predictions.
AI models, smaller in scope and scale, capable of
processing, understanding & generating natural
language content, audio, video, etc.
Making information about an AI system available 
to relevant stakeholders in an accessible and 
understandable manner, to the extent technically 
feasible.
Ease with which users comprehend AI operations 
and outputs.
An exercise, reflecting real-world conditions, that 
is conducted as a simulated adversarial attempt 
to compromise organizational missions and/or 
business processes to provide a comprehensive 
assessment of the security capability of the 
information system and organization.

India AI Governance Guidelines
47
Annexures 
Background of the Drafting Committee
Overview of global AI governance frameworks
Overview of current laws in India applicable to AI systems 
Applicability of existing laws in India to AI harms 
Types of voluntary frameworks for AI risk mitigation 
Standards published/under development by BIS

Constitution of the Committee
The Government of India  set up a high-level advisory group in 2023 under the chairmanship of the 
Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to examine various issues relating to AI. The committee under PSA, 
after extensive deliberations, set up a sub-committee on AI governance, that included Prof Balaraman

Ravindran, Debjani Ghosh and Sharad Sharma. The subcommittee prepared a draft report which 
was published by MeitY for public feedback. More than 2,500 submissions were received from 
government bodies, academic institutions, think tanks, industry associations, private sector organisations, 
and individual stakeholders.  A drafting committee was formed (Committee) to review stakeholder

feedback and has prepared this report on the AI governance framework.
Annexure 1: Background of the Drafting Committee
Terms of Reference of the Committee
The Terms of Reference of the subcommittee set up by the PSA and the drafting committee constituted 
by MeitY, 
To recommend a governance framework that promotes innovation and adoption of AI in

India while mitigating the risks to individuals and society. 
To present a rationale for India’s approach to AI governance based on local factors.
To create a foundation of trust so that future development of AI promotes long-term growth, 
resilience and sustainability of India’s digital ecosystem. 
To provide a set of practical guidelines for industry to promote ease of doing business and 
global competitiveness of Indian firms. 
To provide guiding principles for sectoral agencies and regulators to make informed decisions 
with respect to AI governance in their respective domains.

India AI Governance Guidelines
48
Members of the Committee
The Committee constituted by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) in 
July 2025 to draft this report comprises the following members:
Name & Affiliation
Designation
Balaraman Ravindran, Professor, IIT Madras
Chairman

Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Member
Invitee Member
Member Convenor
Member
Lead Writer
Abhishek Singh, Additional Secretary, MeitY
Debjani Ghosh, Distinguished Fellow, NITI Aayog
Kalika Bali, Advisor, Safe and Trusted AI, IndiaAI

Rahul Matthan, Partner, Trilegal 
Amlan Mohanty, Non-Resident Fellow, NITI Aayog
Sharad Sharma, Co-founder, iSPIRT
Kavita Bhatia, Scientist G, MeitY & COO, IndiaAI
Abhishek Aggarwal, Scientist D, MeitY
Avinash Agarwal, DDG(IR), DoT
Shreeppriya Gopalakrishnan, DGM, IndiaAI

India AI Governance Guidelines
49
Annexure 2: Overview of Global AI governance frameworks
Jurisdiction 
Australia
Summary of Approach
Ongoing deliberations on a government whitepaper titled
“Safe and Responsible AI in Australia”, proposing mandatory 
guardrails to regulate AI in high-risk settings and general-purpose 
AI models.

Brazil
Proposals for a new AI law (Bill No. 2,338/2023) that promotes 
secure, reliable AI systems, categorizing them by risk and imposing 
various compliance requirements.
Canada
Published the draft Artificial Intelligence and Data Act (AIDA) 
that focuses on responsible AI use, consumer protection, and fair

competition. The law is still at the parliamentary review stage.
China
Technology-specific regulations aimed at specific issues, including 
algorithmic recommendations and generative AI. Various national 
standards for AI systems and ‘Labeling Rules’ have also been intro-
duced to enhance the security and governance of generative AI. 
European Union

Statutory framework in the form of the Artificial Intelligence Act 
that categorizes systems by risk levels, imposes stringent 
requirements on high-risk applications, and aims for transparency 
and accountability.
Japan
Adopted the law on Promotion of AI-Related Technologies in 
May 2025. It establishes an AI Strategy Center and implements

non-binding guidelines to promote innovation and adoption. 
The framework emphasizes voluntary compliance and international 
cooperation.
Singapore 
Voluntary, use-case based approach that emphasizes a sectoral 
approach based on governance frameworks. It has released a 
draft Model AI Governance Framework for Generative AI to
address emerging risks and provide guidance for safety evaluations.

It has developed practical testing methods such as Veritas and 
AI Verify, which allow organisations to evaluate fairness and
transparency in real use cases.
United Kingdom
Context-based and cross sectoral framework that focuses on core 
principles (safety, transparency, fairness, accountability, 
contestability) that will be implemented by existing sectoral 
regulators.

India AI Governance Guidelines
50
United States
of America
A pro-innovation approach that emphasises innovation, 
infrastructure development and international diplomacy to 
promote American leadership and global competitiveness. 
Voluntary commitments, such as the NIST AI Risk Management 
Framework, and some executive orders relating to AI governance

are applicable.
South Korea
Adopted the Basic Act on the Development of Artificial
Intelligence and Establishment of Trust. The Act adopts a 
risk-based approach focusing on high-impact AI systems and 
generative AI transparency requirements, with moderate enforce-
ment through administrative fines.
New Zealand
Developed the Algorithm Charter for Aotearoa New Zealand

in 2020 which applies specifically to public sector algorithmic 
decisions, establishing six commitments for fair, ethical, and 
transparent government algorithm use. The framework emphasizes 
human oversight and Māori data sovereignty considerations.
Israel
"Artificial Intelligence Regulations and Ethics" encourages 
"responsible AI innovation in the private sector" through a

principled-based, sector-specific regulatory approach using 'soft' 
tools, such as non-binding ethical principles and voluntary 
standards.
South Africa
National AI Policy Framework establishes twelve strategic pillars 
for responsible AI development. The framework emphasizes 
human-centered AI, addressing socioeconomic disparities 
through talent development, digital infrastructure, and ethical 
governance.

Below is an illustrative list of statutes and regulations in India that may be applicable to the 
development, deployment and use of AI systems.
India AI Governance Guidelines
51
Annexure 3: Overview of current laws in India relevant to AI systems
(Illustrative)
Information Technology Act, 2000 (IT Act):

The IT Act remains the backbone of India’s digital regulation. Section 66D addresses cheating 
by personation using computer resources, applicable to AI-generated impersonations and 
deepfakes. Section 79, along with the 2021 Intermediary Guidelines, places due diligence 
obligations on online platforms, requiring active monitoring and takedown of unlawful AI-generated

content, including misinformation and harmful deepfakes.
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS): 
In addition to the IT Act, certain harms/cybercrimes perpetuated by AI could also fall under the 
BNS. For instance, identity theft and cheating by personation are offences under Section 319(2)

(cheating by personation), section 336(1) and 336(2) (forgery for the purpose of cheating), section 
294 and 296 (selling/circulating/distributing obscene objects), and section 356(1) (causing harm 
to reputation/defamation).

Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP Act):
The DPDP Act introduces obligations of consent, purpose limitation, and data minimisation 
that have direct bearing on AI model training and deployment. It prohibits processing of personal 
data without consent, requires safeguards against misuse of sensitive data, and empowers the 
Data Protection Board to investigate harms caused by misuse of AI-driven profiling. These

provisions create accountability pathways for AI developers and deployers handling personal 
data at scale.
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (CPA): 
The CPA protects consumers against unfair trade practices, misleading advertisements, and 
deficiency of service. Its provisions can be invoked where AI-enabled systems mis-sell financial 
products, misrepresent the capabilities of AI-driven health devices, or cause consumer harm

through opaque algorithms in e-commerce. The Central Consumer Protection Authority is 
empowered to order corrective advertising or levy penalties on misleading AI claims, including 
advanced forms of dark patterns.
Sectoral legislations:
Sector-specific legislations such as the Telecommunications Act, 2023, under which rules are 
being notified in areas such as cybersecurity,  critical infrastructure, and incident reporting also

strengthen the implementation of AI governance principles.
AI-specific guidelines:
Sectoral regulators and technical bodies have been adapting their mandates to address AI-specific 
risks, issuing frameworks on cybersecurity, fairness, robustness, and ethical safeguards. These 
initiatives reflect the operational realities of each domain: financial stability in banking, integrity 
in securities markets, safety and reliability in telecom, and accountability in healthcare. Collectively, 
they demonstrate how India’s oversight architecture is evolving in practice.

India AI Governance Guidelines
52
Reserve Bank of India (RBI): 
RBI’s regulatory architecture on technology risk has progressively expanded to cover AI. The 
Cybersecurity Framework for Banks (2016) established board-approved cyber policies, continuous 
monitoring, incident reporting, and resilience planning, all of which extend to AI-enabled services.

The Digital Lending Guidelines (2022) require transparency, consent, and accountability in 
automated decision-making, and are now expected to incorporate disclosure obligations for 
AI-driven credit scoring and fairness audits.
Building on these foundations, the Framework for Responsible, Explainable and Ethical AI 
(FREE-AI) Committee Report (2025) sets out detailed AI-specific measures: adoption of

board-approved AI policies covering governance, lifecycle management, vendor oversight, and 
annual review; integration of AI-specific threats such as adversarial attacks and model poisoning 
into cybersecurity protocols; and the creation of a tiered incident reporting system for AI failures, 
including bias, explainability gaps, and unintended outcomes.
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI):

SEBI’s Cybersecurity and Cyber Resilience Framework requires market infrastructure institutions 
and intermediaries to maintain security operation centres, conduct vulnerability assessments, 
and submit compliance reports. AI-driven trading algorithms and surveillance systems fall under 
this framework, linking automation to accountability for market integrity. SEBI has also released 
a consultation paper on “Guidelines for responsible usage of AI/ML In Indian Securities Markets”

in June, 2025.
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (IRDAI): 
IRDAI mandates insurers and intermediaries to comply with its Guidelines on Information and 
Cyber Security for Insurers, with direct implications for AI-driven underwriting, claims management, 
and fraud detection.
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR):

The Ethical Guidelines for Application of AI in Biomedical Research and Healthcare set 
expectations for safety, transparency, accountability, fairness, and human oversight. They require 
bias audits, independent ethics review, data quality checks, and delineation of responsibility 
between developers and healthcare providers.
Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC): 
TEC has issued a Voluntary Standard for Fairness Assessment and Rating of AI Systems, covering

bias detection and mitigation, and is developing a Standard for Assessing & Rating Robustness 
of AI Systems in Telecom Networks and Digital Infrastructure. TEC has also published a Draft 
Standard for the Schema and Taxonomy of an AI Incident Database in Telecommunications 
and Critical Digital Infrastructure. These standards provide structured pathways for trustworthy 
AI assessment focusing on fairness, robustness, and incident reporting in areas like critical 
infrastructure, network optimisation, and service quality management.

India AI Governance Guidelines
53
CERT-In and NCIIPC (cross-sectoral cybersecurity): 
Under the IT Act, 2000, CERT-In Directions (2022) mandate entities to report cybersecurity 
incidents within six hours, retain logs for 180 days, and enable audits. These requirements 
directly cover AI systems integrated into cloud platforms, fintech, or critical infrastructure.  The

NCIIPC Rules (2014) designate critical information infrastructure sectors and require mandatory 
safeguards, monitoring, and incident response, provisions highly relevant to AI deployment in 
energy, telecom, and transport.
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS): 
The BIS Technical committee LITD 30 develops standards in the area of artificial intelligence 
for India.  This committee also contributes to the development of International Standards (for 
eg. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 42 “Artificial intelligence”). The list of standards published/under development 
by BIS are in Annexure 6.

India AI Governance Guidelines
54
Annexure 4: Applicability of existing laws in India to regulate AI harms
(illustrative)
Nature of Harms
Applicable Statutory Law
Depiction of a child in a 
sexually explicit video that is 
AI-generated
Information Technology Act, 2000

Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
Prevention of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
Unauthorized impersonation 
using AI-generated deepfakes
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
Information Technology Act, 2000
Use of an individual’s personal

data without consent to train 
AI models
Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023
Information Technology Act, 2000
Misleading ads about the 
reliability or performance 
of an AI service
Consumer Protection Act, 2019
Use of copyright-protected material 
in AI-generated content without

permission of the author or
owner
The Copyright Act, 1957
Use of AI/ML technologies in the 
securities market for the purpose 
of 
algorithmic 
trading 
and 
artificially affecting the market 
trends.
SEBI Act, 1992
Banking Regulation Act, 1949

Sectoral Guidelines by SEBI and RBI 
Discrimination in hiring decisions 
using AI recruitment tools
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019
Code on Wages, 2019
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989

India AI Governance Guidelines
55
Annexure 5: Types of voluntary frameworks (illustrative)
Adopted at an organisational 
level, they are guidelines on 
safe, responsible and ethical 
AI 
use 
in 
the 
form 
of 
non-binding principles.
Developer's Playbook for Respon-

sible AI in India published by 
NASSCOM.
Voluntary Measures
Description
Examples 
Responsible 
AI Principles 
Technical guidelines issued 
by standard setting bodies.
Draft 
standards 
issued 
by 
Telecommunication Engineer 
Center 
(TEC) 
on 
"Fairness 
Assessment 
and 
Rating 
of

Artificial Intelligence Systems” 
and 
the 
list 
of 
standards 
published/under development 
by BIS contained in Annexure 6.
Technical 
Standards
Collective pledges by industry 
or multi-stakeholder groups, 
typically requiring disclosure 
of actions taken to honour 
commitments.
International Code of Conduct

for Organizations Developing 
Advanced AI Systems (adopted 
at G7, Hiroshima meeting)
Voluntary 
Commitments
Self-assessment or third-party 
review and audits of AI 
systems, with results disclosed 
to the public or regulators in 
the form of certification marks.
Certification for AI tools in 
telecom, education, health, law.
Audits

India AI Governance Guidelines
56
Annexure 6 : Standards published/under development by BIS
Sl. No.
IS No.
Title
IS/ISO/IEC 20546: 2019
IS/ISO/IEC/TR 20547-1: 2020
01
Information Technology - Big Data -

Overview and Vocabulary
Information technology Big data reference
architecture
Part 1: Framework and application process
02
IS/ISO/IEC 20547-3: 2020
IS/ISO/IEC 22989: 2022
03
Information technology Big data reference
architecture
Part 3: Reference architecture

Information technology- Artificial intelligence-
Artificial intelligence concepts and terminology
04
IS/ISO/IEC 23053: 2022
IS/ISO/IEC 23894: 2023
05
Framework for Artificial Intelligence AI
Systems Using Machine Learning ML
Information technology - Artificial intelligence -
Guidance on risk management

06
IS/ISO/IEC/TR 24028: 2020
IS/ISO/IEC/TR 24029-1: 2021
07
Information technology Artificial intelligence
Overview of trustworthiness in artificial
intelligence
Artificial Intelligence AI Assessment of the
robustness of neural networks
Part 1: Overview

08
IS/ISO/IEC 24029-2: 2023
IS/ISO/IEC/TR 24030: 2024
09
Artificial intelligence AI Assessment of the 
robustness of neural networks
Part 2: Methodology for the use of formal methods
IS/ISO/IEC/TR 24368: 2022
11
Information Technology Artificial Intelligence
Overview of Ethical and Societal Concerns
Information technology Artificial intelligence
AI Use cases
10

India AI Governance Guidelines
57
IS/ISO/IEC/TR 24372: 2021
Information technology Artificial intelligence AI
Overview of computational approaches for AI
systems
12
IS/ISO/IEC 24668: 2022
IS/ISO/IEC/TS 25058: 2024

13
Information technology Artificial intelligence
Process management framework for big data
analytics 
Systems and Software Engineering- Systems and
Software Quality Requirements and Evaluation
(SQuaRE) -Guidance for Quality Evaluation of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) Systems
14
IS/ISO/IEC 25059: 2023
IS/ISO/IEC 38507: 2022

15
Software engineering Systems and software
Quality Requirements and Evaluation SQuaRE
Quality model for AI systems
Information technology Governance of IT
Governance implications of the use of artificial
intelligence by organizations
16
IS/ISO/IEC 42001: 2023
IS/ISO/IEC/TS 4213: 2022

17
Information Technology - Artificial Intelligence-
Management System
Information technology Artificial intelligence
Assessment of machine learning classification
performance
18
IS/ISO/IEC 5338: 2023
IS/ISO/IEC 5339: 2024
19
Information Technology- Artificial Intelligence-
AI System Life Cycle Processes

IS/ISO/IEC/TR 5469: 2024
21
Artificial Intelligence -Functional Safety and
AI Systems
Information Technology -Artificial Intelligence- 
Guidance for AI Applications 
20
IS/ISO/IEC 8183: 2023
Information technology - Artificial intelligence-
Data life cycle framework
22

India AI Governance Guidelines
58
IS/ISO/IEC 5259-1: 2024
IS/ISO/IEC 5259-2: 2024
23
Artificial intelligence — Data quality for analytics
and machine learning (ML) —
Part 1: Overview, terminology, and examples

Artificial intelligence — Data quality for analytics
and machine learning (ML) —
Part 2: Data quality measures
24
IS/ISO/IEC 5259-3: 2024
IS/ISO/IEC 5259-4: 2024
25
Artificial intelligence — Data quality for analytics

and machine learning (ML) —
Part 3: Data quality management requirements
and guidelines
Artificial intelligence — Data quality for analytics
and machine learning (ML) —
Part 4: Data quality process framework
26
Reliability assessment of AI systems
Implementation guidance on de-identification of data used in Machine Learning (ML)
Verification and validation analysis of AI systems
Overview of differentiated benchmarking of AI system quality characteristics
Guidance for output data quality of generative AI applications
Standards under development

India AI Governance Guidelines
59
References
i
Katja Grace, Harlan Stewart et. al, “Thousands of AI Authors on the Future of 
AI,” arXiv, January 2024, https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.02843
ii
iii
Reserve Bank of India, “FREE-AI Committee Report,” August 2025,

https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/FREEAIR130820250A2
4FF2D4578453F824C72ED9F5D5851.PDF
Reserve Bank of India, “FREE-AI Committee Report,” August 2025,

https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/FREEAIR130820250A2
4FF2D4578453F824C72ED9F5D5851.PDF
iv
“India to Deploy 38,000 GPUs, Set Up 600 Data Labs: MeitY,” The Economic

Times, September 9, 2025, 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/artificial-intelligence/india-to-de
ploy-38000-gpus-set-up-600-data-labs-to-strengthen-ai-ecosystem-meity/ar
ticleshow/123790588.cms?from=mdr

v
Data provided by India AI Mission.
vi
India AI Mission, “AI Kosh,” Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology 
(“MeitY” hereinafter), Government of India, https://aikosh.indiaai.gov.in/home
vii
Press Information Bureau, “India to host AI Impact Summit in February 2026,

focusing on democratizing AI to solve real-world challenges across sectors,” 
July 30, 2025, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2150204
viii
Data provided by India AI Mission.
ix
Press Information Bureau, “India to host AI Impact Summit in February 2026,

focusing on democratizing AI to solve real-world challenges across sectors,” 
July 30, 2025, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2150204  
x
See “AI Adoption Index 2.0: Tracking India’s Sectoral Progress in AI Adoption,”

NASSCOM, August 2024, 
https://nasscom.in/knowledge-center/publications/ai-adoption-index-20-trac
king-indias-sectoral-progress-ai-adoption#
xi
BCG, “Unlocking AI’s Potential in India: Transforming Agriculture and 
Healthcare,” March 2025, 
https://web-assets.bcg.com/5e/2c/2eb053c141ed93a3d46ac0e00e59/unlockin
g-the-potential-of-ai-in-india.pdf

India AI Governance Guidelines
60
xii
See Amlan Mohanty, “Compute for India: A Measured Approach,” Carnegie 
India, Commentary, May 17, 2024, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/posts/2024/05/compute-for-india-a-measure

d-approach?lang=en  See also Anirudh Suri, “The Missing Pieces in India’s AI 
Puzzle: Talent, Data, and R&D,” Carnegie India Paper, February 24, 2025, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2025/02/the-missing-pieces-in-indi

as-ai-puzzle-talent-data-and-randd?lang=en
xiii
xiv
Keyzom Ngodup Massally, Rahul Matthan, and Rudra Chaudhuri, “What is 
the DPI Approach,” Carnegie India, April 15, 2023, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2023/05/what-is-the-dpi-approach?

lang=en
See Ministry of External Affairs, “Quad Principles for Development and 
Deployment of Digital Public Infrastructure,” Government of India, 
September 21, 2024, 
https://www.mea.gov.in/bilateral-documents.htm?dtl/38329/Quad+Principles
+for+Development+and+Deployment+of+Digital+Public+Infrastructure

xv
MeitY, “India AI Mission.” Lok Sabha Starred Question, July 23, 2025, 
https://sansad.in/getFile/loksabhaquestions/annex/185/AS42_UcKpjr.pdf?sour
ce=pqals
xvi
MeitY, “Empowering Public Sector Leadership: A Competency Framework for

AI Integration in India,” Government of India, March 2025, 
https://indiaai.s3.ap-south-1.amazonaws.com/docs/empowering-public-sector
-leadership-a-competency-framework-for-ai-integration-in-india.pdf
xvii
Reserve Bank of India, “FREE-AI Committee Report,” August 2025,

https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/FREEAIR130820250A2
4FF2D4578453F824C72ED9F5D5851.PDF
xviii
See Vasudev Devadasan, “Report on Intermediary Liability in India,” Centre for

Communication Governance, December 2022, 
https://ccgdelhi.s3.ap-south-1.amazonaws.com/uploads/reportonintermediary
liabilityinindia-web-180123-344.pdf
xix
Bilal Mohamed, “Five Ways in Which the DPDPA Could Shape the 
Development of AI in India,” Future of Privacy Forum, September 6, 2024,

https://fpf.org/blog/five-ways-in-which-the-dpdpa-could-shape-the-develop
ment-of-ai-in-india/ 
xx
See Dominic Paulger, “New Report Examines Generative AI Governance 
Frameworks Across the Asia-Pacific Region,” Future of Privacy Forum, May 22, 
2024, 
https://fpf.org/blog/new-report-examines-generative-ai-governance-framewo
rks-across-the-asia-pacific-region/

India AI Governance Guidelines
61
xxi
See Anulekha Nandi, “AI Governance in India,” The National Bureau of Asian 
Research, September 2025, 
https://www.nbr.org/wp-content/uploads/pdfs/publications/brief-nandi-sept2
5.pdf  
xxii
xxiii

Aihik Sur, “IAMAI raises concerns over DPDP Act clause impacting AI model 
training in India,” Money Control, August 7, 2025, 
https://www.moneycontrol.com/artificial-intelligence/iamai-raises-concerns-o
ver-dpdp-act-clause-impacting-ai-model-training-in-india-article-13414149.ht

ml
Jyothsana Gurumurthy, "In the Pursuance of a Robust Legal Framework to 
Address Deepfake
Harms: An Analysis of the Indian Legal Discourse," Indian Journal of Law and 
Technology, Vol. 20 Issue 1, 2025,  https://repository.nls.ac.in/ijlt/vol20/iss1/1.

xxiv
See European Parliament, “Generative AI and Watermarking,” European 
Parliamentary Research Service, December 2023, 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2023/757583/EPRS_BR
I(2023)757583_EN.pdf.

xxv
C2PA and Content Credentials Explainer,” Coalition for Content Provenance 
and Authenticity, April 2025, 
https://spec.c2pa.org/specifications/specifications/2.2/explainer/_attachments/
Explainer.pdf
xxvi
Content Credentials: C2PA Technical Specification,” Coalition for Content

Provenance and Authenticity, May 2025, 
https://spec.c2pa.org/specifications/specifications/2.2/specs/_attachments/C2P
A_Specification.pdf.
xxvii
See Ellen Goodman, Kaylee Williams & Justin Hendrix, “Synthetic Media 
Policy: Provenance and Authentication — Expert Insights and Questions,”

Tech Policy Press, May 2, 2025, 
https://www.techpolicy.press/synthetic-media-policy-provenance-and-authe
ntication-expert-insights-and-questions/.
xxviii
See Arul George Scaria & Varsha Jhavar, “Striking the Balance: Adapting

Indian Copyright Law for GenAI and Beyond,” SSRN, January 24, 2025, 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/Delivery.cfm/5115655.pdf?abstractid=5115655&miri
d=1  See also Sejal Sharma, “Tech Firms, Content Industry Debate AI,

Copyright at Ministry of Commerce Event,” Hindustan Times, June 21, 2025, 
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/tech-firms-content-industry-de
bate-ai-copyright-at-ministry-of-commerce-event-101750507825625.html
xxix
Aakriti Bansal, “India Forms Committee to Study the Intersection of AI and 
Copyright Law,” Medianama, May 1, 2025, 
https://www.medianama.com/2025/05/223-india-ai-copyright-law-committee/

India AI Governance Guidelines
62
xxxi
xxx
See Shourya Shekhar, “Training AI, Testing Law-India’s Copyright Challenge 
with TDM,” Law School Policy Review, August 8, 2025, 
https://lawschoolpolicyreview.com/2025/08/08/training-ai-testing-law-indias-

copyright-challenge-with-tdm/ 
xxxii
xxxiii
See Adam Buick, “Copyright and AI training data—transparency to the 
rescue?,” Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice, March 2025, 
https://academic.oup.com/jiplp/article/20/3/182/7922541

The White House, “Winning the Race: America’s AI Action Plan,” Government 
of the United States of America, July 2025, 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Americas-AI-Actio
n-Plan.pdf
xxxiv
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “Global AI Governance Action Plan,” Government

of People’s Republic of China, July 26, 2025, 
https://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xw/zyxw/202507/t20250729_11679232.html
xxxv
Amlan Mohanty and Shatakratu Sahu, “India’s Advance on AI Regulation,”

Carnegie India, November 21, 2024, 
https://carnegieendowment.org/research/2024/11/indias-advance-on-ai-regul
ation?lang=en 
xxxvi
Towards Digital Safety by Design for Children,” OECD Digital Papers, June 
2024,

https://www.oecd.org/content/dam/oecd/en/publications/reports/2024/06/tow
ards-digital-safety-by-design-for-children_f1c86498/c167b650-en.pdf.
xxxvii
eSafety Commissioner Advisory, “AI Chatbots and Companions - Risks to

Children and Young People,” Government of Australia, February 18, 2025, 
https://www.esafety.gov.au/newsroom/blogs/ai-chatbots-and-companions-ris
ks-to-children-and-young-people#
xxxviii
See Puran Choudhary, “Need India AI Risk Framework, says Academic Amlan

Mohanty,” The Economic Times, July 22, 2025, 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/artificial-intelligence/need-india-
ai-risk-framework/articleshow/122820675.cms?from=mdr
See Prof. Balaraman Ravindran and Dr. Geetha Raju, "AI Incident Reporting

Framework for India,” August 2025 (publication awaited). 
xxxix
See Agarwal Avinash and Nene Manisha, "Advancing Trustworthy AI for 
Sustainable Development: Recommendations for Standardising AI Incident 
Reporting," 2024 ITU Kaleidoscope, doi: 10.23919/ITUK62727.2024.10772925

xl
See Amlan Mohanty, “Making AI Self-Regulation Work: Perspectives from 
India on Voluntary AI Risk Mitigation,” Centre for Responsible AI, April 2025, 
https://cerai.iitm.ac.in/docs/selfregulation.pdf

India AI Governance Guidelines
63
xlii
xli
See “Voluntary Commitments from Leading Artificial Intelligence Companies 
on July 21, 2023,” Harvard Law Review, February 2024, 
https://harvardlawreview.org/print/vol-137/voluntary-commitments-from-leadi

ng-artificial-intelligence-companies-on-july-21-2023/
xliii
xliv
See Rahul Matthan, “The Zone of Mischief,” ExMachina, January 17, 2024, 
https://exmachina.in/17/01/2024/the-zone-of-mischief/https://exmachina.in/17/

01/2024/the-zone-of-mischief/
iSPIRT, “FAQs and Facts on Techno-Legal Regulation,” September 3, 2025, 
https://pn.ispirt.in/faqs-and-facts-on-techno-legal-regulation/
xlv
NITI Aayog, “Data Empowerment and Protection Architecture,” Government

of India, August 2020, 
https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-03/Data-Empowerment-and-Pr
otection-Architecture-A-Secure-Consent-Based.pdf 
xlvi
See “An Introduction to DEPA,” 2024, 
https://depa.world/learn/about-depa/an-introduction-to-depa.

xlvii
“Strengthening Emergency Preparedness and Response for AI Loss of 
Control Incidents,” RAND Institute, July 30, 2025, 
https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RRA3847-1.html
xlviii
ee Amlan Mohanty, “Making AI Self-Regulation Work: Perspectives from India

on Voluntary AI Risk Mitigation,” Centre for Responsible AI, April 2025, 
https://cerai.iitm.ac.in/docs/selfregulation.pdf 
xlix
l
li
A parallel may be drawn with the Grievance Appellate Committee (GAC) 
redressal process under the Information Technology (Intermediary

Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. The GAC deals with 
appeals from users aggrieved by decisions of Grievance Officers of social 
media and other intermediaries pertaining to violation of the Rules or Act. 
See NIC, “Grievance Appellate Committee,” Government of India, September

2025, https://gac.gov.in/ 
Suprateek Mitra and Rattanmeek Kaur, “Decoding AI Development: The 
Efficacy of the Value Chain Ontology,” Aapti Institute, September 13, 2024, 
https://aapti.in/blog/decoding-ai-development-the-efficacy-of-the-value-chain

-ontology/
Press Information Bureau, “India to host AI Impact Summit in February 2026, 
focusing on democratizing AI to solve real-world challenges across sectors,” 
July 30, 2025, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2150204
See Avinash Agarwal and Manisha J. Nene, “A Five-Layer Framework for AI

Governance: Integrating Regulation, Standards, and Certification,” 
Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy, May 2025, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/TG-03-2025-0065