No. 20(3)/2022-CERT-In 
Government of India 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) 
  
Electronics Niketan, 
6 CGO Complex, 
 New Delhi-110003 
 
Dated: 28 April, 2022

Subject: Directions under sub-section (6) of section 70B of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 relating to information security practices, 
procedure, prevention, response and reporting of cyber incidents 
for Safe & Trusted Internet.  
  
Whereas, the Central Government in terms of the provisions of sub-section (1)

of section 70B of Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000 (IT Act, 2000) has 
appointed “Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In)” vide 
notification dated 27th October 2009 published in the official Gazette and as per 
provisions of sub-section (4) of section 70B of IT Act, 2000 The Indian Computer

Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agency for performing the 
following functions in the area of cyber security:- 
a) collection, analysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents; 
b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents; 
c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents; 
d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;

e) issue guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and whitepapers relating to 
information security practices, procedures, prevention, response and 
reporting of cyber incidents; 
f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed. 
And whereas, “The Information Technology (The Indian Computer Emergency 
Response Team and Manner of performing functions and duties) Rules, 2013”

were notified and published vide notification dated 16.01.2014 by the Central 
Government in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (zf) of sub-section (2) 
of section 87 read with sub-section (5) of section 70B of the IT Act, 2000.

Page 2 of 8 
 
And whereas, as per provisions of sub-section (6) of section 70B of the IT Act, 
2000, CERT-In is empowered and competent to call for information and give 
directions to the service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate 
and any other person for carrying out the activities enshrined in sub-section (4)

of section 70B of the IT Act, 2000.  
  
And whereas, various instances of cyber incidents and cyber security incidents 
have been and continue to be reported from time to time and in order to coordinate 
response activities as well as emergency measures with respect to cyber security 
incidents, the requisite information is either sometime not found available or

readily not available with service providers/data centres/body corporate and the 
said primary information is essential to carry out the analysis, investigation and 
coordination as per the process of law.   
 
And whereas, it is considered expedient in the interest of the sovereignty or 
integrity of India, defence of India, security of the state, friendly relations with

foreign states or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of 
any cognizable offence using computer resource or for handling of any cyber 
incident, that following directions are issued to augment and strengthen the cyber 
security in the country:  
(i) All service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate and

Government organisations shall connect to the Network Time Protocol 
(NTP) Server of National Informatics Centre (NIC) or National Physical 
Laboratory (NPL) or with NTP servers traceable to these NTP servers, for 
synchronisation of all their ICT systems clocks. Entities having ICT 
infrastructure spanning multiple geographies may also use accurate and

standard time source other than NPL and NIC, however it is to be ensured 
that their time source shall not deviate from NPL and NIC. 
(ii) Any service provider, intermediary, data centre, body corporate and 
Government organisation shall mandatorily report cyber incidents as 
mentioned in Annexure I to CERT-In within 6 hours of noticing such

incidents or being brought to notice about such incidents. The incidents can 
be reported to CERT-In via email (incident@cert-in.org.in), Phone (1800-
11-4949) and Fax (1800-11-6969). The details regarding methods and 
formats of reporting cyber security incidents is also published on the 
website of CERT-In www.cert-in.org.in and will be updated from time to 
time.

Page 3 of 8 
 
(iii)When required by order/direction of CERT-In, for the purposes of cyber 
incident response, protective and preventive actions related to cyber 
incidents, the service provider/intermediary/data centre/body corporate is 
mandated to take action or provide information or any such assistance to

CERT-In, which may contribute towards cyber security mitigation actions 
and enhanced cyber security situational awareness. The order / direction 
may include the format of the information that is required (up to and 
including near real-time), and a specified timeframe in which it is required, 
which should be adhered to and compliance provided to CERT-In, else it

would be treated as non-compliance of this direction. The service 
providers, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate and Government 
organisations shall designate a Point of Contact to interface with CERT-In. 
The Information relating to a Point of Contact shall be sent to CERT-In in 
the format specified at Annexure II and shall be updated from time to time.

All communications from CERT-In seeking information and providing 
directions for compliance shall be sent to the said Point of Contact. 
(iv) All service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate and 
Government organisations shall mandatorily enable logs of all their ICT 
systems and maintain them securely for a rolling period of 180 days and

the same shall be maintained within the Indian jurisdiction. These should 
be provided to CERT-In along with reporting of any incident or when 
ordered / directed by CERT-In. 
(v) Data Centres, Virtual Private Server (VPS) providers, Cloud Service 
providers and Virtual Private Network Service (VPN Service) providers,

shall be required to register the  following accurate information 
which  must be maintained by them for a period of 5 years or longer 
duration as mandated by the law after any cancellation or withdrawal of 
the registration as the case may be: 
a. Validated names of subscribers/customers hiring the services 
b. Period of hire including dates

c. IPs allotted to / being used by the members 
d. Email address and IP address and time stamp used at the time of 
registration / on-boarding 
e. Purpose for hiring services 
f. Validated address and contact numbers 
g. Ownership pattern of the subscribers / customers hiring services

Page 4 of 8 
 
(vi)     The virtual asset service providers, virtual asset exchange providers and 
custodian wallet providers (as defined by Ministry of Finance from time to 
time) shall mandatorily maintain all information obtained as part of Know 
Your Customer (KYC) and records of financial transactions for a period of

five years so as to ensure cyber security in the area of payments and 
financial markets for citizens while protecting their data, fundamental 
rights and economic freedom in view of the growth of virtual assets.  
For the purpose of KYC, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Directions 2016 
/ Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) circular dated April 24,

2020 / Department of Telecom (DoT) notice September 21, 2021 mandated 
procedures as amended from time to time may be referred to as per 
Annexure III. 
  
With respect to transaction records, accurate information shall be 
maintained in such a way that individual transaction can be reconstructed

along with the relevant elements comprising of, but not limited to, 
information relating to the identification of the relevant parties including 
IP addresses along with timestamps and time zones, transaction ID, the 
public keys (or equivalent identifiers), addresses or accounts involved (or 
equivalent identifiers), the nature and date of the transaction, and the

amount transferred. 
             
And whereas, the meaning to the terms ‘cyber incident’ or ‘cyber security 
incident’ or ‘computer resource’ or other terms may be ascribed as defined in the 
IT Act, 2000 or “The Information Technology (The Indian Computer Emergency 
Response Team and Manner of performing functions and duties) Rules, 2013” as

the case may be.  
  
And whereas, in case of any incident, the above-referred entities must furnish 
the details as called for by CERT-In. The failure to furnish the information or 
non-compliance with the ibid. directions, may invite punitive action under sub-
section (7) of the section 70B of the IT Act, 2000 and other laws as applicable. 
 
This direction will become effective after 60 days from the date on which it is 
issued. 
*****

Page 5 of 8 
 
Annexure I 
 
Types of cyber security incidents mandatorily to be reported by service 
providers, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate and Government 
organisations to CERT-In: 
 
[Refer Rule 12(1)(a) of The Information Technology (The Indian Computer

Emergency Response Team and Manner of Performing Functions and Duties) 
Rules, 2013] 
i. Targeted scanning/probing of critical networks/systems 
ii. Compromise of critical systems/information 
iii. Unauthorised access of IT systems/data 
iv. Defacement of website or intrusion into a website and unauthorised changes

such as inserting malicious code, links to external websites etc. 
v. Malicious code attacks such as spreading of virus/worm/Trojan/Bots/                 
Spyware/Ransomware/Cryptominers 
vi. Attack on servers such as Database, Mail and DNS and network devices such 
as Routers 
vii. Identity Theft, spoofing and phishing attacks

viii. Denial of Service (DoS) and Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks 
ix. Attacks on Critical infrastructure, SCADA and operational technology 
systems and Wireless networks 
x. Attacks on Application such as E-Governance, E-Commerce etc. 
xi. Data Breach

xii. Data Leak 
xiii. Attacks on Internet of Things (IoT) devices and associated systems, 
networks, software, servers 
xiv. Attacks or incident affecting Digital Payment systems 
xv. Attacks through Malicious mobile Apps 
xvi. Fake mobile Apps 
xvii. Unauthorised access to social media accounts

xviii. Attacks or malicious/ suspicious activities affecting Cloud computing       
systems/servers/software/applications 
xix. Attacks or malicious/suspicious activities affecting systems/ servers/ 
networks/ software/ applications related to Big Data, Block chain, virtual 
assets, virtual asset exchanges, custodian wallets, Robotics, 3D and 4D 
Printing, additive manufacturing, Drones

Page 6 of 8 
 
xx. Attacks or malicious/ suspicious activities affecting systems/ 
servers/software/ applications related to Artificial Intelligence and Machine 
Learning 
The incidents can be reported to CERT-In via email (incident@cert-in.org.in), 
Phone (1800-11-4949) and Fax (1800-11-6969). The details regarding methods and 
formats of reporting cyber security incidents is also published on the website of 
CERT-In www.cert-in.org.in and will be updated from time to time. 
*****

Page 7 of 8 
 
Annexure II 
Format for providing Point of Contact (PoC) information by Service 
providers, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate and 
Government organisations to CERT-In 
The Information relating to the Point of Contact shall be sent to CERT-In 
via email (info@cert-in.org.in) in the format specified below and shall be 
updated from time to time: 
Name 
 
Designation 
 
Organisation Name 
 
Office Address 
 
Email ID 
 
Mobile No. 
 
Office Phone 
 
Office Fax 
 
*****

Page 8 of 8 
 
Annexure III 
KYC Requirements 
For the purpose of KYC, any of following Officially Valid Document 
(OVD) as a measure of identification procedure prescribed by the Reserve 
Bank of India (Know Your Customer (KYC)) Directions, 2016 /  Securities

and Exchange Board of India Clarification on Know Your Client (KYC) 
Process 
and 
Use 
of 
Technology 
for 
KYC 
vide 
Circular 
SEBI/HO/MIRSD/DOP/CIR/P/2020/73 dated April 24, 2020 / The 
Department of Telecom File No: 800-12/2021- AS.II dated September 21,

2021 on Self-KYC (S-KYC) as an alternate process for issuing of new 
mobile connections to Local and Outstation category customers, shall be 
used and maintained: 
a. The passport, 
b. The driving license, 
c. Proof of possession of Aadhaar number,  
d. The Voter's Identity Card issued by the Election Commission of

India, 
e. Job card issued by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the State 
Government and  
f. Letter issued by the National Population Register containing details 
of name and address. 
g. Validated phone number  
h. Trading account number and details, Bank account number and bank 
details

For the purpose of KYC for business entities (B2B), documents mentioned 
in the Customer Due Diligence (CDD) process prescribed in Reserve Bank 
of India Master Direction - Know Your Customer (KYC) Direction, 2016 
as updated from time to time shall be used and maintained.  
*****