Call for Expression of Interest: IndiaAI Safety Institute Partners 
Submission Guidelines 
1. Background 
The Ministry of Electronics and IT (‘MeitY’) has launched the national-level IndiaAI Mission to 
democratize and catalyze the AI research and innovation ecosystem in India.  
The "Safe & Trusted AI" pillar of the mission emphasizes the need to ensure the responsible

development, deployment, and adoption of AI in India. This involves the development of technical 
tools, guidelines, frameworks, commitments, and standards that are contextualized to India’s 
unique challenges and opportunities with respect to harnessing AI’s transformative potential. 
To implement the objectives of the pillar, IndiaAI has created the IndiaAI Safety Institute. This

Institute will advance science-based and indigenous research on AI governance, pioneering 
innovative approaches to AI safety that are relevant to the developing world.  
2. IndiaAI Safety Institute 
The IndiaAI Safety Institute will guide the broader objectives of fostering safety, transparency, 
accountability, and fairness in AI solutions and building trust in the use of the technology. Among

other things, the IndiaAI Safety Institute will: 
a) Establish and ensure implementation of India’s Safe and Trusted AI principles; 
b) Undertake research and development of indigenous tools, technologies, benchmarks, 
measurement systems, and other outputs that promote safe AI practices and mitigation of 
existing as well as emerging AI risks and harms; 
c) Establish robust frameworks, guidelines, commitments, protocols, best practices and other 
support structures for India-specific AI governance;

d) Unite and foster collaboration between AI developers, deployers, academia, government, 
industry, startups and civil society organizations in support of safe and trusted AI; 
e) Coordinate with relevant government bodies and standard-setting organizations to ensure 
harmonization of efforts towards AI governance; 
f) Form and oversee sectoral Sub-Committees that will complement efforts of and work in

conjunction with sectoral regulators;  
g) Conduct workshops, awareness, and training programs to empower key stakeholders in 
managing and mitigating AI risks effectively; 
h) Bolster India’s readiness to address the capabilities of the next generation of AI models 
and/or systems; 
i) Support India’s efforts towards global cooperation on AI, bringing forth the unique

challenges and opportunities of the developing world; 
j) Formulate partnerships with international institutions, including academic and research 
institutions, other AI Safety Institutes and global AI experts to co-design and adapt 
international best practices on Safe and Trusted AI. 
3. IndiaAI Safety Institute Partners 
The IndiaAI Safety Institute is responsible for ensuring that AI in India is developed, deployed,

and adopted in a safe, secure, inclusive, and trustworthy manner, protecting Indian citizens from 
any harm from the use of AI. In support of its efforts, the IndiaAI Safety Institute is calling for 
expressions of interest for onboarding partners to create a network to expand its capacity, 
harnessing the broader community's potential, interests, and capabilities. 
IndiaAI seeks to leverage the additional resources and capabilities made available through the 
network of IndiaAI Safety Institute partners to augment its research and development work,

enhancing the country’s overall preparedness for next-generation AI technologies and enabling 
governance structures tailored to India's specific needs.  
Through this initiative, IndiaAI Safety Institute also aims to create a convening space for 
collaborators to have an informed dialogue and enable the sharing of information and knowledge 
with respect to AI advancements.

This call for expression of interest is an integral part of IndiaAI’s overall vision of collaboration 
with researchers, academia, industry, other government agencies, and startups to address 
challenges associated with the development and deployment of AI.  
4. Scope of Work 
The IndiaAI Safety Institute partners will support its mandate of advancing indigenous research

and development for Safe and Trusted AI development, deployment and use in India. Each 
IndiaAI Safety Institute Partner will establish a dedicated IndiaAI Safety Institute Cell to deliver 
on the scope of work allocated to the partner institute. The various IndiaAI Safety Institute Cells 
will function as decentralized capacity of the IndiaAI safety institute, executing the assigned

technical mandate.  
The scope of work of each partner institution is envisaged to be dynamic to respond to the fast-
evolving needs and challenges of the AI ecosystem. The IndiaAI Safety Institute will allocate the 
scope of work amongst the network of selected partner institutions based on the following:  
a) Expertise of the partner institution;  
b) Proposed areas of support indicated by the institution; 
c) Detailed proposal for each proposed area of support; 
d) Composition of the proposed IndiaAI Safety Cell; 
e) Work plan of the IndiaAI Safety Institute.

4.1 Broad Areas of Work 
IndiaAI Safety Institute Partners may support the Safety Institute across any of the following 
broad areas of work: 
a) Technical Research on AI Safety; 
b) Legal research on AI Safety (including on India-specific AI governance); 
c) Meta-Data and Data Quality Standards;

d) Data Governance; 
e) Capacity Building (including workshops, training exercises, and sensitivity programs); 
f) AI Testing, Evaluation, and Benchmarking; 
g) Design and Development of AI Tools and Frameworks (including provenance tools, privacy-
enhancing technologies, and machine unlearning tools, among others);

h) AI Red-Teaming; 
i) AI Metrology; 
j) India-specific common terminologies, taxonomies and risk inventories including mitigation 
stratgeies; 
k) Models, and/or products to support and demonstrate pathways to enable safe and 
trustworthy AI systems; 
l) Data Collaboratives / Curation and maintenance of high-quality datasets 
4.2 Institutional Capacity 
Each partner organization will establish a dedicated IndiaAI Safety Cell. This specialized unit will 
be responsible for executing the allocated mandate of the partner institution.

Structure and Composition of the IndiaAI Safety Cell 
a) The Cell shall be headed by a Lead, who must have demonstrated expertise in the relevant 
areas highlighted in the partner institution’s proposal.  
a. The Lead will be expected to devote at least 50% of their time to the activities of the 
Safety Cell to ensure sustained leadership and technical oversight.

b. The Lead must have over 10 years of experience in AI Safety research. 
b) The Cell will be supported by a minimum of three full-time technical staff, including: 
a. One technical resource who will be co-located with the IndiaAI Safety Institute at 
IndiaAI, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), New Delhi.

b. Two technical resources stationed at the Partner Institute. 
c. Each Technical Resource must have 5 years of demonstrated experience in design, 
development and deployment of AI/ML products and solutions. 
c) The Cell must also be supported by other part-time resources of the partner institution(s) 
with the required qualification to implement the scope of the proposal.

d) IndiaAI reserves the right to modify the minimum requirements for qualification of the 
IndiaAI Safety Institute cell based on emerging challenges and opportunities within the AI 
landscape. 
Functional Mandate 
a) The IndiaAI Safety Cell will be responsible for executing the tasks allocated to the partner 
institution. 
b) It will actively collaborate with other Safety Cells across partner organizations as well as 
with the IndiaAI Safety Institute, ensuring:

a. Consistency in evaluation approaches and methodologies. 
b. Interoperability in tools, systems, and datasets. 
c. Shared learning and collective progress through knowledge exchange, joint research, 
and technical consultations.  
d. Harmonization of implementation strategies and building collaborative synergies 
across Cells. 
5. Eligibility

The Applicants should meet the following criteria to be eligible for evaluation under this EoI: 
S. No.  
 Prequalification Eligibility Criteria of Applicants Documents Required 
5.1 
The applicant must be a Legal Entity i.e., a company 
incorporated in India under the Companies Act, 
1956 or 2013

OR 
Registered as a partnership firm under the 
Partnership Act, 1932 or a limited liability 
partnership under the Limited Liability Partnership 
Act, 2008 in India 
OR 
An entity registered under the Indian Trust Act, 
1992 
OR 
a) Incorporation Certificate of 
the company/Memorandum

of Association (MoA) / Article 
of Association (AoA) 
b) PAN Card of the registered 
legal entity 
c) GST certificate of the 
registered legal entity 
d) 
Certified 
copy 
of 
registration 
e) Partnership Deed; copy of 
Statement 
filed 
in 
the 
Register of Firms disclosing 
names, 
addresses 
and

Registered under the Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises Development Act, 2006 
OR 
Registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860 
OR 
A start-up should adhere to the extant norms as 
notified by DPIIT  
OR 
Any Central/State government organization/agency 
And  
The entity must have at least 51% shareholding with

Indian citizens or persons of Indian origin and the 
entity should not be a subsidiary company of any 
foreign corporation. 
relevant details of all partners 
of the Partnership Firm 
f) 
MSME 
Certificate 
(if 
applicable) 
g) 
Any 
other 
supporting 
document, 
as

may 
be 
required. 
5.2 
Educational Institutions: Organizations should have 
the pre-existing Lab infrastructure (Lab having 
Workstations, Servers, Project Staff etc.) for project 
implementation along with relevant research 
publication.  
All Institutions falling in the following categories 
would be eligible to participate: 
a) Indian Institutes of Technologies (IITs)

b) National Institutes of Technologies (NITs) 
c) Indian Institutes of Information Technology 
(IIITs) 
d) Indian Institutes of Science Education and 
Research (IISERs) 
e) Central Universities/Deemed Universities 
under Central/State Government 
f) Colleges/Institutions

of 
National 
Importance/Eminence 
g) R&D 
Organizations/Institutions 
(Having 
B.Tech /MTech/PhD courses) 
Private 
Universities/ 
Private 
Deemed 
Universities/Private Colleges: Private Institutions 
that 
offer 
undergraduate/postgraduate/diploma/certificate

programs in Artificial Intelligence are eligible to 
apply. Institutions should be approved by AICTE 
and/or the Institution should be accredited by NAAC 
(National Assessment and Accreditation Council of 
UGC). 
5.3 
The participating institution must: 
a) Have demonstrable expertise in the field of AI. 
b) Not be insolvent, in receivership, bankrupt or 
being wound up, not have its affairs administered by 
Self-declaration duly signed 
by the authorized signatory of 
the 
company 
on 
official 
Letterhead.

a court or a judicial officer, not have its business 
activities suspended and must not be the subject of 
legal proceedings for any of the aforesaid reasons. 
c) (Including their affiliates, subsidiaries, or 
contractors for any part of the contract): 
a. Not stand declared ineligible/ blacklisted/

banned/ 
debarred 
by 
the 
Procuring 
Organisation 
or 
any 
Ministry/ 
Department/CPSE/State government from 
participation in its procurement processes; 
and/ or 
b. Not be convicted (within three years 
preceding the last date of EOI submission) or

stand 
declared 
ineligible/ 
suspended/ 
blacklisted/ 
banned/ 
debarred 
by 
appropriate agencies of the Government of 
India/CPSE/State 
government 
from 
participation in procurement processes of all 
its entities, for: 
c. Offenses involving moral turpitude in 
business dealings under the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988 or any other law; 
and/or 
d. Offenses under the Indian Penal Code or any 
other law for causing any loss of life/ limbs/ 
property or endangering Public Health

during 
the 
execution 
of 
a 
public 
procurement contract and/ or 
Suspected to be or of doubtful loyalty to the 
Country or a National Security risk as determined by 
appropriate agencies of the Government of India. 
 
6. Process 
IndiaAI is seeking responses from all eligible institutions (see eligibility) with relevant technical

capabilities to join the IndiaAI Safety Institute network and contribute through research, tools, 
data resources, frameworks, and technical expertise to augment the Institute’s capacity to 
enable Safe and Trusted AI.  
There may be continuing opportunities to participate and be onboarded through subsequent 
EoIs, which will remain open to participants who are not selected initially.

6.1 Submission Guidelines 
a) Eligible organizations are to submit only one response detailing all focus areas for 
collaboration.  Multiple responses by the same organization will lead to disqualification 
from the application process. 
b) Applicants must submit complete EOI response webforms by 11:59 PM IST on the 9th of

June 2025 to be considered. Incomplete applications, applications submitted through other 
means or applications submitted past the deadline will be rejected. 
c) The total length of the Proforma should not exceed 20 pages. 
d) Applicants are welcome to apply jointly with other partner organizations. Roles and 
responsibilities of each institution must be detailed in the Proforma.

e) Applicants should read and adhere to the Terms and Conditions governing the Grant-in-
Aid. 
f) Any information found to be inaccurate will lead to the disqualification of the application. 
g) IndiaAI may contact applicants if there are further questions regarding the completed EoI 
webforms.  
6.2 Funding Guidelines

Applicants are advised to adhere to the following guidelines when submitting budgetary 
requirements for their projects: 
a) Partner institutions are to support 50% of the total project cost estimated. 
b) IndiaAI’s share of Funding will not be allocated for the purchase of hardware platforms like 
workstations, servers, laptops, or computers.

c) The allocation for 'Contingency’ should not exceed 5% of the total project budget. 
d) The allocation for Overhead' should not exceed 10% of the total project budget. 
e) The allocation for 'Travel' should not exceed 5% of the total project budget.

f) A breakdown of the capital equipment and manpower allocation required for the proposed 
project should be provided.  
g) An indicative list of consumable items (if any) must be provided in the budget.  
6.3 Terms and Conditions 
Acquisition & Management of Assets 
The grantee institution shall maintain an audited record in the form of a register for permanent 
and semi-permanent assets acquired solely or mainly out of the IndiaAI grant. The applicable 
procedures for procurement shall be followed for acquisition of assets.

a) The assets referred to above will be the property of IndiaAI and should not, without prior 
sanction of IndiaAI, be disposed of, encumbered or utilized for purposes other than those 
for which the grant has been sanctioned. 
b) The grantee institution shall send a list of assets referred above to IndiaAI at the end of

each financial year as well as at the time of seeking further installments of the grant; should 
the grantee institution at any time cease to exist, such assets shall revert to IndiaAI. 
Utilization of grants and Audit 
a) The grantee institution should maintain a separate audited account for the IndiaAI Safety 
Institute Cell. If it is found expedient to keep a part or whole of the grant in a bank account

earning interest, the interest, thus earned, should be reported to IndiaAI. The interest so 
earned will be treated as a credit to the grantee institution to be adjusted towards future 
installment of the grant; IndiaAI or its nominee/s will have the right of access to the books 
and accounts of the grantee institution for which reasonable prior notice would be given.

b) The grantee institution shall render an audited statement of accounts and utilization 
certificate to IndiaAI, every year. The audited statement of accounts relating to grants given 
during the financial year together with the comments of the auditor regarding the 
observance of the conditions governing the grant should be forwarded to the IndiaAI within

six months following the end of the relevant financial year. 
c) The utilization of grant for the intended purposes will be looked into by the Auditor of 
grantee institution according to the directives issued by the Government of India at the 
instance of the Comptroller and Auditor General and the specific mention about it will be 
made in the audit report. 
d) The grantee institution shall render progress-cum-achievement reports at intervals of not 
exceeding six months on the progress made on all aspects of the IndiaAI Safety Institute 
Cell including expenditure incurred on various approved items during the period.

e) The grantee institution will refund the unspent balance in addition to the interest, if any 
accrued on the unspent balance in the total outlay of the IndiaAI Safety Institute Cell.  
f) IndiaAI, an IBD under Digital India Corporation or MeitY will be at liberty to take appropriate

action under the Rule 212(1) of GFR 2005 relating to utilization of funds in the specified 
time and where such certificate is not received from the grantee within the prescribed time 
(reference General Financial Rules 2005).  
g) Grantee institution is not allowed to entrust the implementation of any project for which

grants-in-aid is received to another institution and to divert the grant-in-aid received from 
IndiaAI as assistance to the latter institution. 
h) IndiaAI reserves the right to modify these terms and conditions governing the grant-in-
aid from time to time reflecting the directions of the Government of India. 
In case of any dispute on any other matter related to the project during the course of its

implementation, the decision of the CEO, IndiaAI shall be final. 
Inquiries 
All inquiries regarding the IndiaAI Safety Institute Partners as well as this EoI must be submitted 
in writing exclusively to the following email address: 
fellow1.gpai-india@meity.gov.in. 
6.4 Evaluation of EOIs

IndiaAI will select partners who have submitted a complete EOI based on a variety of parameters 
including the breadth and depth of their technical expertise, cost-effectiveness, prior experience 
in collaborating with the Government on AI/emerging technology projects, AI research and 
development experience, proposed areas of support, among others. 
Each proposed area of support will be evaluated independently and comparatively against other 
submissions within the same thematic area.

IndiaAI reserves the right to apply additional criteria, as deemed appropriate, to ensure strategic 
alignment with the IndiaAI Safety Institute’s mandate. 
IndiaAI will establish an independent evaluation committee for evaluation of each completed and 
eligible expression of interest. The decision of the IndiaAI will be final and binding. 
6.5 Allocating Scope of Work to IndiaAI Safety Institute Partners

The IndiaAI Safety Institute will allocate the scope of work to each of the selected partner 
institutions along with defined timelines based on the expertise of the institution, areas of 
support proposed within their respective EoI application, and detailed proposals for each 
proposed area of support. The strength of the proposed IndiaAI Safety Institute cell will also be

evaluated.   
Each selected partner institution will be required to enter into an agreement with IndiaAI, which 
will also include their agreed-upon mandate and scope of work.   
The IndiaAI Safety Institute will retain the final authority in determining the allocation of work. It 
also reserves the right to direct multiple partner institutions to collaborate jointly on specific

workstreams, wherever such collaboration is deemed necessary or appropriate to fulfill the 
objectives of the IndiaAI Safety Institute. 
7. Timelines 
# 
Particulars 
Date 
a) 
Date of EoI Publishing 
9th May 2025 
b) 
Last Date for EoI Submission 
9th June 2025 
 
8. Intellectual Property Rights

8.1 The work of the IndiaAI Safety Institute (‘Collective Outputs’) will be open and transparent, 
provide a hub for interested parties to collaborate and co-create outputs. All Collective Outputs 
of the IndiaAI Safety Institute shall be dedicated to the public domain to be freely used by all, 
with the exception highlighted under 8.3.

8.2 The Collective Outputs, including research and development results, reports, training 
material, tools, and other outputs of IndiaAI Safety Institute will be published on the Institute 
website & AIKosh and other communication channels of Government of India (including IndiaAI 
Portal, MyGov, among others.), at the discretion of IndiaAI. All IndiaAI Safety Institute Partners

affiliated with the Collective Output will be duly credited and their contribution attributed at the 
discretion of IndiaAI. 
8.3 IndiaAI may classify certain Collective Outputs as confidential and may restrict the publication 
of such outputs, including any outputs that may raise national security concerns. All efforts will 
be undertaken by IndiaAI to make all relevant partners aware of such classification prior to

undertaking any work on the respective output.